Nationalekonomiska föreningens förhandlingar 1957, sammanträdet 1957-03-22
Ämne: British experience of disinflationary policy in 1955-1956
Ohlins roll: talare; Ohlin talar på tryckta s. 47, 50
PDF-sidor 46–58 i https://www.nationalekonomi.se/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/nf-1957.pdf
(OCR-text, oredigerad; kan börja eller sluta med en bit av angränsande sammanträde)


BRITISH EXPERIENCE OF DISINFLATIONARY POLICY IN 1955/56
45
no more, or is it beginning to run slack? I believe that this year it is
running substantially slack, and that vve can therefore increase our
overseas illvestments.
The other argument, which is no doubt in the mind of the authorities,
is that we must not push on too much with reflationary measures, but
must build up our gold reserves first. I do not believe myself in that
argument. The argument that we cannot afford to have our industries
running up to full capacity because they will then begin to import
so much that we shall not be able to build up our gold reserves is, I
believe, fundamentally wrong. It is desirable to build up a gold
reserve. We always have the International MOl1etary FU11d to help us
out if we run short as we have been helped out in these last few nl0nths.
I was all in favour of the readjustment and in favour of switching over
resources from consumption to investment goods industries. However~
I do not believe that in the last resort one ought to tolerate during
too long a period that the consumption goods industries should work
decidedly below their capacity when the investment goods industries
are not absorbing the labo1lr released but are themselves running slack.
According to the plant and equipment figures which we have now got
the actual delivery of plant and equipnlent during the summer half-
year was 11 per cent below the preceeding half. A slight part of this
serious drop is seasonal, but not the major part. When tIle investment
goods industries themselves are beginning to get slack, I think we must
re-stimulate our economy and remove the obstacles to investment, even
if we shall later have to re-stimulate consumption in order to revive
the motive for investment. I do 110t believe one ought to let the
economy run slack in order to build up a gold reserve, and yet I fear
that this argument may carry some weight in the official mind.
What I would say is this: I believe that the scelle is now set for a
relaxation of these disinflationary measures which I have tried to
describe. I think there will be some delay in moving in that direction
owing to this argument about the external balance and the gold reserve.
None the less, I think that as unemployment grows and as the slackness
is visible -and remains visible, people will say: now we must nlove
forward again.
You may say that I have been neglectful -
b1lt it is too late for llle
to take up a new topic -
of wages. It is an intricate problem,
especially in this moment when half the British people seems to be
on strike! I am sure that whatever comes out of these strikes you will
find that the wage increases -
and notably the' increase in ,vage
payments, which is almost more significant than the increase in the
official rates -
will be more moderate this year than it has been



46
NATIONALEKONOMISKA FORENINGENS SAMMANTRADE DEN 22 MARS 1957
the last two years. I have rather neglected this topic;
but I
have
tried to indicate the main lines of our industrial investment boom,
which has passed its peak, so that we are now in the course of a
recession of moderate dimensions. It remains to see what the author-
ities will do about it.
The chairman: On behalf of all those present I want to extend our
sincere thanks to Professor Harrod for a stimulating lecture, packed
with brilliant ideas. For tho'se of us who hitherto have only had the
opportunity of making Professor Harrod's acquanintance by reading
his books and articles, it has heen a fascinating experience to listen to
the lecturer in person.
I suggest that we underline our appreciation with an applause.
Mr. I. Booth: I just want to ask a couple of questions.
My first question is: Is not the slackening of new orders partly due to the
fact that British industry is not competitive to the same extent as before? If
this is the case: which industries are still competitive and which are not?
My second question is: To what extent is the pressure on sterling and on
the entire economy due to the fact that some of the Sterling area countries such
as India are drawing heavily on their balances?
Let me finally say that it is very interesting to hear from professor Harrod
that some of the troubles in England are the result of the fact that whereas
the Government on one side tries to persuade the industries to reduce their
investments the Government itself is contJnuing to make investments. I hope
that the British Government has· now suoceeded in at least stopping some of the
excessive investments in the nationalized industries.
Professor R. F. Harrod: As regards the last question, I would like to think
that they had stopped the excessive investnlents in the nationalized industries,
but I very much doubt it. Nationalized industries have become a sort of
sovereign powers. They have their own constitutions, and the Government
finds that it is very difficult to maintain control over them in spite of the
fact that it has to find the money for them. It is rather a paradoxical situation.
I am grateful for the first question, because I ought to make myself clear
on this point. Mr. Rooth says: Is not the slackening of orders perhaps due to
the fact thaf British industry is not cOlnpetitive? I was only referring to a
particular class of orders viz. the domestic orders on investment account. The
amount of orders on machine tools is decreasing in Britain. You may say that
this is perhaps because more British firms go abroad to get machine tools.
There is a big import of machine tools, but I do not think there has recently
been an increase in the orders placed abroad on machine tools. ·Anyhow, the
order of magnitude would be wrong. The decline in delnand for domestic
machine tools is of a far greater order than the anlount of imported machine
toolS\. But actually, our export orders have not been doing too badly. We do
not have reliable figures covering these things, but according to official



BRITISH EXPERIENCE OF DISINFLATIONARY POLICY IN 1955/56
47
spokesmen there is no sign yet of a decline of our export orders. We may
have expected a decline, because the whole world has now passed beyond the
boom we have been in, and we must face a decline on that account. But we
have no evidence of a decline in export orders -
rather, on the contrary, of
booming export orders.
Then Mr. Rooth mentioned that India is drawing on her balance. We have
a good co-operation in the International Monetary Fund, and we got some of
the money back through drawings by India on the International Monetary
Fund. I do not know whether there are special reasons for the Indian drawings;
but there may be a tendency for some parts of the Sterling area to draw on
their sterling balances and then build up gold reserves rather independently
of us. I suppose India would like to have a bigger gold reserve. There are still
currency arrangements, however, by which sterling is held as a currency
reserve. And there are other inducements for a country like India to hold
sterling. After all, India is not a rich country. They are at present earning
4 per cent on their sterling balances, and they do not earn 4 per cent on gold.
Perhaps the dollar interest rate is going up, but I do not think they will
continue to earn as much as 2 per cent on dollar balances.
But I understand Mr. Rooth's main point is that we have got to face the fact
that certain parts of the Sterling area -
though not countries like Australia
and New Zealand -
may as time goes on wish to substitute a gold reserve for
their sterling reserves. For this reason we may see their sterling balances going
down and perhaps replaced by gold balances. I do not think, however, that this
is going to happen very quickly. I do not think it is a problem for this year
or next year; it is a long-run problem, but you have to think about it.
Professor B. Ohlin: Professor Harrod has given us a brilliant lecture and
thrown new light on recent development in Great Britain. We have found
everything of what he has said very interesting. Some of us have been not least
interested in what .he said about the patterns of behaviour of state-owned
industries. We have a recent case about a state-owned industry which is the
only institution in this country which has not heard about the existence of
credit restrictions. So there are similarities in the behaviour patterns in Sweden
and Great Britain here as in so many other aspects.
I should like to ask professor Harrod this question: If you re-establish
equilibrium in your balance of payments by means of a restrictive policy,
which reduces investments below the desirable level, is that a sign that you
can relax your policy again? Will you not then create a new lack of balance?
Should you not have something that is more than equilibrium in your balance
of payments and in your total economy before you can relax your policy? I
think we have seen some cases in the world after the war where this has
happened. I suppose that if you had not had this decline in investment, the
balance of payments would have been less favourable, so if you now increase
your investment again, your balance of payments will weaken. If your balance
of payments in the twelve months' period from the summer of 1956 to the
summer of 1957 will be slightly favourable in spite of the Suez crisis are you
then sure that your balance of payments position will be so strong that it can
withstand· the pressure that may come from a change in your disinflationary
policy? Is it not possible that the British cost-level may be a little bit too high
compared with the cost-levels in Germany, Holland and maybe some other



48
NATIONALEKONOMISKA FORENINGENS SAMMANTRADE DEN 22 MARS 1957
countries? During a period of full emploYlnent your balance of paylnents is
weak. As soon as you restrict employment and invesbnent, your balance of
payments will be strong enough. Now one has asked whether your and our
b~Iance of payments is strong enough when we have as full a level of
employment as we should like to have. If you are right, then I suppose we can
be optimistic, because we are very much in a similar position.
I want to add one point. If the world boom slackens a little -
and we have
to count with that possibility -
that will probably exert a heavier pressure
on the British balance of payments than on the balance of other countries. A
slackening of the world boom would reduce raw material prices and might
create some difficulties for countries that export primary commodities. SOine
of these countries belong to the British empire and the Sterling area. I have
not followed so closely the development during the last few years, but on
earlier occasions this has happened. Is it not necessary that your balance of
payments is so strong that you can withstand the double pressure from a
slackening of the world boom and from some increase in your investlnents
before you start to relax your policy?
I apologize for putting these questions, as you said so lnany interesting
things in your lecture, but we could probably draw a parallel between your
case and our own.
Professor R. F. Harrod: Professor Ohlin has put before you what one
might describe as an orthodox view -
J''-am not meaning this in any way
offensively. I think he probably speaks w.ords which are in the mind of our
authorities. But I personally think that the policy is over-cautious and won't
lead to the desired result. On several pOints I could agree. It is quite true
that if we had had more activity in the country last year, we would have had
a less favourable balance of payrnents, given the exports. But I do not know
how to reckon this question on the balance of payments. Something like the
Suez crisis does not happen every year -
at least we hope it won't happen
every year -
and such an event is an occasion when I think that you are
entitled to draw on your reserve and have a less favourable balance than you
would otherwise have.
The general view is that without the Suez crisis we would have had a
substantially favourable balance of the order of say £ 300 million. If we had
also had full activity in the year, it would have been less than £ 300 million,
but still -
I think -
positive. Now, you can say that we have to wait for the
gold reserve to build up again. I just cannot believe it is the right policy to
produce less than you can produce, given the full level of employment. I think
I was the first to say that we had got into unhealthy conditions two years
. ago, when the orders were greater than we could meet, when unfilled vacancies
and shortages and bottlenecks were holding us up and we had all these
inflationary symptoms. On the other hand, I am against going to the other
side of the line and keeping down employment below the full level, seeing
your capacity standing idle, with a view to building up your reserve. I am
rather in favour of taking the risk. Let us go on and import what we have
to import to keep our people busy.
I do not think that in the last resort the people of any country will tolerate
an economic system in w·hich w.e cannot keep people fully employed because
we cannot have a favourable ·balance if they are employed. They begin to ask:



BRITISH EXPERIENCE OF DISINFLATIONARY POLICY IN 1955/56
49
Are we not iInporting something that is unnecessary? Can we not cut down
certain unnecessary imports in order to buy raw 111aterials to keep the people
fully elnployed? This goes against the philosophy which l\lr. Roath has been
expounding for some years and my philosophy too. I do not want to re-enter
the phase of putting on restrictions on unnecessary iluports. But I think that
if you deliberately keep employment down -
and as long as you have this
credit squeeze you can be said to keep employment do\vn -
on the argulllent
that you cannot afford to import the Inaterials people would use when in
employment, you are bound to provoke a political reaction. I do not believe
it will happen in that way, but I think that in the last resort you would sooner
or later restrict some of the unnecessary imports rather than keep people out
of work.
I alTI not in favour of an inflationary situation, but I have tried to argue
this evening that I am of equal hostility to a deflationary situation, a situation
of industrial depression.
Professor Ohlin Inentioned the relative levels of costs. I cannot believe that
we have really reached the end of the enormous margin we gave ourselves by
the devaluation of 1949. You all know how difficult it is in this moving world
to compare costs. It may be that the German costs are considerably lower, but
people in Germany are raising up their wages, and in the last year wage rates
have probably risen more in Germany than in Britain. Maybe the efficiency
has increased, too. However, I think this conclusion is rather premature. Let
us see how things work and let us be prepared to take the risks to maintain
full employnlent. Let us do what we can to check our own people's wage
demands, but not to the extent of leaving them unemployed.
Then I COlne to the very interesting question of what happens in a world
slump. I think it is difficult to talk about a world sluInp, because we do not
know what a new world slump is going to be like. If you consider the overall
balance, then I think Britain is not one of the greatest sufferers from a world
slump, because in the old-fashioned world, slump our import prices fell so
lnuch. But if you take the overall balance of the Sterling area or the dollar
balance of the Sterling area, you get slightly different results.
I think it is difficult to make yourself prepared to meet a world slump if
you do not know what form it is going to take. Are there going to be cata-
clysmic falls in the
price~ of primary products? Are the governments of
different countries going to allow a serious slackening of the activity without
taking corrective measures? Will there in fact be a world slump? We may
have minor recessions, but a slight recession such as the one we are having in
Britain now is quite another thing. I very much doubt whether any government
in any country is going to allow a major slump. We have our eyes all the time
on the United States, where a great American slump might come; but I believe
it never will come. I think they are going to have a bit of recession about the-
end· of this year, but they have had small recessions before.
Mr. I. Rooth: I think it would be too optimistic to suppose that India would
be able to keep its sterling balances. The reason for India drawing on 4er
sterling balance is' not that she is afraid about the future sterling rate, hut
India is a developing country and needs during her -second five.year plan
even much more foreign currency than she can dispose of.



50
NATIONALEKONOMISKA FORENINGENS SAMMANTRADE DEN 22 MARS 1957
As a second remark about the sterling balances I want to mention that some
of the British colonies have been piling up sterling balances during many
years, and they will now, when they are gaining independence, not only try
to build up their own gold and dollar reserves but also use part of these for
developing the countries. I think from both these sides the pressure on the
sterling balances will continue.
Professor R. F. Harrod: When Mr. Rooth has put it in this way I can agree.,
but I think we can meet the pressure. If my view is right that the industrial
boom is over and our local orders are dropping, we shall in the next five year
have considerable spare industrial capacity and therefore be able to meet not
all the orders of India, which are enormous, but to meet a higher proportion
of the needs of·India and of the colonies. If the drawing by the former on her
sterling balance simply means that India uses her sterling balance to buy
capital goods in Britain and if this is spread over a certain number of years,
as indeed has already happened to some extent under what is known as the
:Colombo plan, I would say that we should be in a position to accelerate the
export of capital goods to India and to finance the capital requirements in the
colonies. Thereby they will use up a proportion of their sterling balances. To
think that all the colonies would use their sterling balances and buy American
equipment because they did not want to wait for British equipment to be
delivered is in my opinion to take too pessimistic a view.
I Wlould say that over the next five years Britain will he able to supply
equipment for the colonies and India at ia greater rate than it has been possible
during our own investment boom for. supplying our own industry. Though
we could not discharge all our liabilities under these large sterling balances,
we would during this five years' period enable the holders of the balan"ces to
draw them down by a substantial amount by buying capital equipment from
the British industries. Till this day Btitish industry has not had
any spare
capacity, but its capacity has been greately increased in the last few years, and
there will be a spare capacity which will he idle if it does not satisfy the needs
of India and the colonies. That is the way I see it.
Professor B. Ohlin: I thank professor Harrod for his interesting comments.
Just to avoid any chance of misunderstanding I want to say first that I agree
entirely with professor Harrod that there is not a great risk of a world slump.
What I had in mind was a slackening of the world boom, a kind of recession
rather than a slump.
Secondly, I also agree wholeheartedly that we simply must pursue a policy
of full employment. But it is not obvious that we can have full employment at
existing cost-levels and existing foreign exchange rates. If you do not want to
sacrify the full employment -
which neither of us do -
and if you cannot
change the relative positions of the cost-levels within reasonable time, then I
suppose the only solution is sooner or later to make some adaption of the
foreign exchange rates.
Professor Harrod has spoken in Stockholm the other day about flexible
foreign exchange rates. Personally I Wiant to say that one advantage of flexible
foreign exchange rates would be that it would be more feasible for govern-
ments to make some minor adaption of foreign exchange rates. If it is true
·as professor Harrod said a moment ago that governments do not like to restrict



BRITISH EXPERIENCE OF DISINFLATIONARY POLICY IN 1955/56
51
investment &c., they are even more reluctant to adjust the foreign exchange
rates.
If I am somewhat less optimistic than professor Harrod, this is due to the
fact that it seems to me that in Western Europe the relative position of cost-
levels is not quite such as to inspire confidence in stability. This may be a
problem, not primarily for Great Britain and Sweden, which are perhaps in
the middle of the scale, but not only for France and Germany having the two
extreme positions.
I should be extremely happy if it would be possible for us to make our
adaptation through a somewhat slower increase in costs than in countries where
costs are relatively low to-day, but I am not perfectly certain that this
optimistic assumption will be justified. The strikes that are going on in Great
Britain to-day may make it doubtful whether the recent development is the
lnost desirable development with regard to wages in Great Britain. I am
inclined to believe that lnost governments are too reluctant to face the problem
of the foreign exchange rates, and while professor Harrod has discussed so
Juany other problems, I would like to hear another lecture on this question
of relative cost-levels.
Professor R. F. Harrod: What professor Ohlin says ll1ay be true, but I am
a bit more optiInistic. I would say that so far nothing has gone wrong with
British exports -
they may go wrong, but all sorts of things lnay go wrong.
The exports have been mounting fairly steeply in the last few years. I. think
it is quite remarkable that in in 1955 the volume of exports went up about
6 per cent in spite of this intense inflationary pressure. During the last year,
in spite of Suez and so on, it has gone up by another 5 or 6 per cent. I do
hot want to see our exports go up lnore quickly. I would hate to have a
devaluation which made our export boom again as it did in 1950 and throw
the whole econolny out of balance.
People say that we are losing our share of. exports, but why should we
retain our share of world export? The Germans have been recovering from
the devastation and abject conditions in 1948, so of course they are increasing
their share in world export. Other countries like the United States have an
increasing population, while we have a stationary one. The trend of the
increase in exports is going up by 5 or 6 per cent in volume. If your exports
go up slightly more than your total national production, that is good enough.
The balance of trade had better Inove slowly. I think we would have a bump
upwards in our exports if we supported the colonial developlnent more quickly.
This year national production has been 2 per cent lower than the preceeding
year, but our exports been 5 or 6 per cent above in volulne; so I am quite
satisfied. Maybe our costs are high, but I do not believe that all the wages
asked by those who are now on strike will be granted, because we do not want
the example to lead to a lot of other wage increases. Of course every country
has got to pare down its costs in order to secure markets in competition, but
I do not believe that wages in Britain are too high now. A rise in wages is a
good thing, because it makes the producers think of paring down their costs.
I do not think our wages are high enough.
Mr. G. CederwaII: I want to make four comlnents on this lecture and on
the discussion.



52
~.\TIONALEKONOMISKA
FORENINGENS
SA~E\lANTRADE DEN 22 MARE 1957
My first comlnent is a rather personal one. I belong to a generation of
economists for whom Mr. Harrod has been a name on the back of a number of
books in our book-shelves, books that we have read with great i~terest ~nd that
have caused some discussion and been most stimulating. We have known Mr.
Harrod also for his contributions to
the political and economic debate,
particularly in the Financial Times. We have known him in that capacity as
a moan who has not avoided controversial subjects and even rather paradoxical
recommendations. I remember that in a certain period after the war when
everybody wanted to increase the investments in the United Kingdom Mr.
Harrod reversed the question and asked: "Are these hardships necessary?" 1
also' remember that when there was a general discussion about· a depreciation
of sterling Mr. Harrod wrote articles advocating an appreciation. Now in the
economic life you can often argue both ways.
Against this background it has been a particular pleasure to listen to Mr.
Harrod this evening. I want to confess that when I heard this lecture I found
his views more reasonble than I had thought before.
My second comments refers to the main topic of the lecture. I think it was
a very great help for us that Professor Harrod underlined with such clarity
that you cannot stop inflationary tendencies by means of credit policy, if there
is a need for' public
investm~nts, including municipalities and .nationalized
industries, to such an amount that they cannot be financed over the 10ng-ternl
capital· market.
I
think that
is a lesson" which we have learnt in several
countries.
On one occasion, however, Mr. Harrod 'seemed to make a recommendation
that we should accept inflation because ihe credit squeeze could not be con-
tinued. Obviously the moral was instead/that we need a combination of credit
policy, an appropriate fiscal policy, and measures to restrict consumption or
at any rate the increase in consumption demand. With regard to public invest-
ments I want to say that we could try td> cut them down. But if we cannot do
that -
and there are obviously some difficulties -
we have to find other
means of financing them than via the capital market or the credit
market";
which would be put out of order if we tried to force them through.
As I said we have now got a good illustration of the combination of various
kinds of economic policy. We cannot ask too much of credit policy -
nor
should we leave it out.
The third question I should like to take up is the one which Mr. Ohlin has
raised already, about the present situation. Professor Harrod pointed out a
number of indications of a certain slack in the United Kingdom economy. ~re
are perhaps somewhat reluctant to accept all those indications. Like Mr. Ohlin
I
think that after the experience of' a long period of inflation and foreign
balance difficulties, we ought to be cautious with measures designed to bring
about a relaxation. Your prescription may be adequate with regard to the
United Kingdom, but not with regard to this country.
In passu I should like to make one comment on what Mr. Ohlin said in this
connection. After the experience of the United Kingdom in the sunlmer of
1955 ·and the experience gained through the devaluation in 1949 I think it
is rather rash to advocate a flexibility in foreign exchange rates, meaning in
this case a certain depreciation. On that point I wish we could hope for the
other kind of development, indicated by Mr. Ohlin: an increase in prices in
the low-cost countries that gradually reduces any disparity that there may be.



BRITISH EXPERIENCE OF DISINFLATIONARY POLICY IN 1955/56
·53
This brings me over to my forth point. If there is a slack in the United
Kingdom economy now with an over-capacity in the capital goods industries,
this may be related with the level of investment in the United Kingdom. Statisti-
cal comparisons between various countries are always precarious, but it is an
outstanding fact that the rate of investment is much
lower in the United
Kingdom than in the major part of the Western European countries, including
Scandinavia, Holland and Germany. Do you think that this corresponds to a
real difference, and -
if so -
have you an explanation for the difference?
It may in the long r'Q:n be of paramount -importance with regard to the.position
of the United Kingdom in the world economy. There are some indications that
the propensity to invest is smaller in the British economy than in fast expanding
countries like Scandinavia and Germany. If there is a particular explanation
of this in the British economy" that may also explain the present short-run
situation.
Professor R. F. Harrod: I must correct a misapprehension. I did not intend
to say that there is at present a surplus capacity in our investment goods
industries, but there is a slackness in the consumer goods industries. My point
is that unless the level of orders on investment account is raised, slackness will
decidedly appear in the' investment goods industries in the course of this year.
Hitherto they have been busy with the back-log of orders which they were
unable to meet in 1954 and 1955, so that there is not a surplus in the capital
goods industries at present.
I have no particular feeling about the nonsense I may have talked in the
past, but I have always thought that the devaluation in 1949 was premature
and overdone -
it was too great and came. too soon. After the Korean out-
break, when the rise in prices throughout. the' world made the devaluation even
more absurd than it had been before. I was advocating an
appreciation of
the currency, undoing at least part of the effect of the devaluation. In Britain
we had to face not only the rise in the import prices due to devaluation but
also the rise in prices due to the Korean outbreak. During this period I was
advocating a revaluation. But actually -
much to the surprise of most people
-
the rise in world dollar prices due to the vast American rearmament program
came to an end in April 1951 and was followed by a fall in world dollar prices.
My advocacy of an appreciation of sterling came to an end at the sanle time.
Were "all those hardships necessary" after the war? The title of my book
may
contain
an element of frivolity. I was personally always, in favour of
putting our exports on the
r absolute top of priority. I thought that we were
going on too quickly with the reconstruction of the nationalized industries,
and
were losing export markets in consequence. We were not then paying
enough
attention
to
exports, because our resources were taken up ·in vast
schemes of investment. I was also in favour of giving consumers more -. I
thought they were exhausted after six years of war 'and that it would be good
for their productivity, morale and general efficiency to have more. In fact,
I was in favour of a policy put into effect, rather successfully, by the Belgians.
The Belgians pursued a policy which I tried -
unsuccessfully -
to advocate
for my own country. Belgium 'had a general recovery, and her balance of trade
" wa~ favourable, :P,ut of course, she had not had as heavy losses as Britain.· I
.- personally think th·at it was the right policy to go on with exports, to give the
'people alittle more than we '\Tere getting and to postpone these large schemes



54
NATIONALEKONOMISKA FORENINGENS SAMMANTRADE DEN 22 MARS 1957
of investment in the nationalized industries which I thought at that point were
premature. But now I have changed around -
though I venture to say that it
is not a change at all in reality. Our exports have been raised to double the
level that they were at when I wrote those things.
I must come finally to the question, whether the level of investment is noto-
riously lower in England than in some other countries. I do not know whether
it is. But if it is, there may be some reasons. I should guess that one reason
for the level of investment in the United Kingdom being lower is that we have
got more already. If you have a heavy capital structure in your country, there
is no need to invest so quickly as in other countries which have a less heavy
'capital structure. Investment is not something that you are forever piling
higher and higher. There is an optimum amount of investment. When you are
well equipped with the most modern form of machinery, there is no need for
investment, except replacing machinery that wear out. Of course the progress
'Of nuclear energy research may compel us to make much more investment in
the coming time.
Another point is that the need for investments is much bigger if the popula-
tion is increasing.. The German post-war figures are quite irrelevant, as the.
Germans a) had to reconstruct their damaged industry after the war and b)
have had to absorb the vast increase in population from the East.
A third point is that a country covering a great area -
such as the United
States -
requires more
investment in transport and so on over the large
distances.
I am not convinced at all that our investments are unsatisfactory as compared
with other European
countries.
It is not satisfactory, of course, as in all
European countries, compared with the United States, but there is no doubt
that since the war we have invested a larger fraction of our national income
than the United States. We have saved each year a larger fraction of our income
than the United States, but their income per head is more than double as high
as ours. Our gross capital formation has been running around something like
17 per cent of our gross national product -
the Americans have been running
by 14 per cent. If you take any figure from any recent year since 1949, you
will see that our gross capital formation as a percentage of the national income
is higher than the American~ but, alas, our gross capital formation per head is
very much lower.
Mr. K. M. Savosnick: I do not understand why you are against an increase
in the volume of exports if this should make it possible for you to pay for your
imports and to achieve balance on your current account. There is
nothing
sacred about the volume of exports. Why should a 6 per cent increase in the
volume be too much? Nothing is much except in relation to the goods you
want to purchase. And increases in the volume of exports are achieved not
solely by an increase in production in the export industries but also by a
diversion of exportable goods from the home market to foreign markets when
a devaluation makes such a diversion profitable.
Another point, which I find more interesting, is the one that Mr. Cederwall
took up about the investment rate in England ·and some other 'countries. Is it
perhaps a plausible explanation that the physical capital structure in England
is such that the capital has a slower turn-over than in Sweden? So much more
of the capital structure may consist of roads and houses and constructions with



BRITISH EXPERIENCE OF DISINFLATIONARY POLICY IN 1955/56
55
a long life-time and a small annual depreciation that the amount of re-invest-
ment needed to keep your capital structure intact is relatively lTIuch less than
the annual amount of re-investment needed to keep, say the Swedish capital
structure intact.
The figures available for investment relate only to gross investment. Although
gross investlTIent is so much lower in England than in Sweden or Germany
and other countries, still net investment -
somehow defined -
lTIay
very
well be as high in England as in Sweden. Of course, the statistical difficulties
Inake conlparisons between the investment rates of different countries pre-
carious, but I think that the capital structure in the United States lTIay also be
centered
on
conlmunications
and
constructions
with
a
long
lifetime.·
However, I do not feel so confident with regard to the U. S. as with regard to
England,
where
a
great part
of
the
capital
seenlS
to
consist of slo\vly
deteriorating equiplnent.
Professor R. F. Ilarrod: Perhaps I have not nlade nlyself clear about the
exports. I am not convinced myself that our exports are inadequate in relation
to our inlports. As I said in lny lecture I believe that the people who say that
we ought to have a larger surplus on external account because we want to
invest more are putting the cart before the horse. When we have enough inter-
nal capacity to provide the colonies with luore capital goods, that will create
the excess of exports. That will happen of its own. But as long as our own
capacity is so overstrained with the task we have set for ourselves, I do not
see any great value in producing this enormous excess of exports. It is the old
meroantilist fallacy.
Suppose your ilnports are 100 and your exports are 105 and people say
that the exports ought to be 110. I would then say that it is inlportant not to
try and jump from 105 to 110 by devaluation this year or next, but to see
that it works up from 105 to 110 at the rate of 1/2 per cent a year during the
next ten years. We do ourselves great harm by sudden j unlps in exports such
as that which occurred after the devaluation in 1949 -
it upsets the whole
economy and creates structural distortions. You ought to work up the exports
gradually.
Mr. Savosnick said that an explanation of the particularly
low
level
of
investment in Britain would be that our capital turns over more slowly. I should
think that this is rather unlikely, as the capital structure so largely consists of
factory capacity. Britain is a highly industrialized country. I think this com-
parison is bogus, because we have made so much investment already. Of course,
we have not got enough if you COlupare with the American exanlple, but we
may have got enough in relation to our own know-how. We do not have enough
technologists and engineers. If we had an abundance of
technologists
and
engineers as in Alnerica and they said to their luanagers that they had to buy
new machines, then there would not be any difficulty about investment.



NATIONALEKONOMISKA FORENINGENS
sammantrade den 14 maj 1957
Ordforande: Fil. lie. Hal v dan A s t I' and
Professor Carsten Welinder inledde aftonens diskllssioll over
Den indirekta beskattningen
Herr ordforande! Arade forsamling! Egentligell star jag har sonl
fel man. Jag hal' haft sa litet att gora med denna kommitte, att jag
inte ar i stand att ge nagra inside informations fran dess arbete eller
narmare diskutera de tekniska detaljerna i dess forslag utan far halla
mig mer till allmanna synpunkter pro et contra en indirekt beskatt-
ning. Lyckligtvis har andra av kommittens experter lovat att stal1a
sig till forfogande och ga mera in pa den tekniska sidan.
I intet land i Ellropa och i fa lander i hela varlden spelar den
indirekta beskattningen sa ringa roll som i Sverige. Ser vi till arets
statsverksproposition -
dar ,den nu foreslagna energiskatten inte ar
medraknad -
finner vi att blott 31 procent av statens totala skatte-
inkomster harror fran indirekta skatter. Lagger vi till kommllnalskat-
ten, finner vi att mindre an en fjardedel av den totala skattesumman
har i landet kommer fran indirekta skatter.
Har hal' jag inte raknat med automobilskattemedlen, da de intal'
en sarstallning. Man kan betrakta dem sasom en avgift for nyttjande
av vagvasendet -
i princip samma sorts avgift som en vagpenning,
som tas upp vid vagbommar. En annan sak ar att de givit betydande
overskott av medel som annu inte kommit vagvasendet till godo. Om-
sattningsskatten pa motorfordon gar daremot in i den allmanna bud-
geten och utgor givetvis en konsumtionsskatt.
Genom att den indirekta beskattningen spelar sa liten roll i Sve-
rige hal' det varit mojligt att ge den en utformning som fran manga
synpunkter ar onskvard. Den generella kritiken mot indirekt beskatt-
ning avser i huvudsak tre ting: den hal' en regressiv fordelnillg, den
inskranker det fria konsumtionsvalet, och den kan ha stora uppbords-
kostnader.
Med att den indirekta beskattningen hal' en regressiv fordelning
menar jag att den i regel utgar med en storre procentsats av Snla



58'
NATIONALEKONOMISKA FORENINGENS
SA~fMANTRXDE DEN
1·1 )1:\J 1957
inkomster an av stora. Nu ar det iute mojligt att saga hur var nuva-
rande indirekta beskattning ar fordelad -
vi hal" ingen konsumtions-
statistik som man kan lita pa i det sammanhanget -
men man marker
genast att den i ringa grad vilaI' pa annat an umbarliga varor. Undan-
tag ar forst oeh framst tullarna, som hal' sin speciella uppgift att fylla.
Till undantagen hoI' oeksa skatten pa margarin oeh andra fettvaror
samt energiskatten, men i ovrigt hal' vi beskattning av ieke 110dvan-
diga varor: sprit, Yin, 01, tobak, sotsaker, palsverk, skonhetsmedel,
gramnl0fonskivor, personbilar etc.
Att en skatt traffar umbarliga varor behover inte betyda att den
inte traffar sma inkomsttagare hart. Ayen en vara som i och for sig
ar umbarlig, kan myeket val av konsumenterna betraktas som nodvan-
dig, sa att de, nar priset stiger genom en skatt, fortsatter att forbruka
den i samma omfattning oeh i stallet minskar forbrukningen av andra
varor -
det heter ju om hrannvinet, att det aldrig blir sa dyrt, att
det inte ar vart sitt pris.
A andra sidan far man nog saga, att J1rvalet av varor SOin ar fore-
mal for indirekt beskattning i viss man tar hansyn till att atskillig
skatteformaga inte traffas tillraekligt av inkomstskatten. Ungdomar
som sitter med goda inkomster oeh anda hal' ratt sma levnadskost-
nader kan ha en skatteformaga,
~om inkomstskatten inte tar till-
raeklig hansyn till. Detsamma galler i viss man andra ensamstaende
samt fabarnsfaIniljer. Hal' satter i stallet konsumtionsbeskattningen
pa lyxbetonade'varor in.
.
Med uttryeket att beskattningen inskranker det fria konsumtions-
valet brukar man avse foljande resonemang: Om en skatt lagges pa
en vara sa att denna stiger i pris, overgar konsumenterna till en sam-
mansattning av forbrukningen SOin de forut betraktade som oekono-
misk. For att ta ett drastiskt exempel kan vi tanka oss en skatt pa
galoseher. Om den hojer galosehernas pris, medfor den inte blott en
belastning for dem
SOin fortfarande anvander galoseher, utan aven
for dem som upphor att anvanda galoseher oeh da blir vata om fot·
terna. Den senare belastningen motsvaras ej av nagon inkomst for det
allmanna.
Om man ser saken fran rent subjektiv synpunkt, maste man saga
att aven beskattningen av alkoholdryeker oeh tobak medfor en sned-
vridning av konsumtionsvalet, men det tar samhallet inte hal1syn till.
Att man inte tar hansyn till det nar det galler alkoholdryeker ar tam-
ligen sjalvfallet, oeh lakarvetenskapen hal' som bekant hlivit mer oeh
Iner kritisk gentemot tobaksbruket. Aven om skatten pa sotsaker in-
skranker forbrukningen, ar detta knappast en snedvridnil1g av kon-

