
===== sida 1 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Report                                                                       
                                                                                  
                                                         Swedish National Election Studies
                                                                                  
     2024:2                                              Department of Political Science
                                                         University of Gothenburg 
                                                         2024.01.16               
                                                                                  
                                                         www.valforskning.pol.gu.se
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Political homogeneity     in                                                 
                                                                                  
     Sweden                                                                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Emma  Olsson                                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== sida 2 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Valforskningsprogrammets rapportserie                               
              Sedan 1950-talet genomför Valforskningsprogrammet empiriska undersökningar om
              den svenska demokratins tillstånd och utveckling. Rapportserien är vår viktigaste pub-
              likationskanal för att bidra till samhällets kunskapsförsörjning på demokratiområdet.
              Målsättningen är att sprida fakta och forskningsresultat som rör val och väljarbeteende
              till en bred publik av forskare, studenter, journalister, politiker och allmänhet.
                                                                                  
              The SNES Program Report Series                                      
              Since the 1950s, Swedish National Election Studies Program conducts empirical
              research on the condition and development of the Swedish democracy. The Report
              Series is one of our main publication outlets. The aim is to publish facts and research
              results about elections and voting behavior to a broad audience of researchers,
              students, journalists, politicians and the public.                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Party abbreviations                                                 
                                                                                  
                    Left Party (V)                                                
                    Social Democratic Party (S)                                   
                                                                                  
                    Green Party (MP)                                              
                    Center Party (C)                                              
                                                                                  
                    The Liberals (L)                                              
                    Conservative Party (M)                                        
                    Christian Democratic Party (KD)                               
                                                                                  
                    Sweden Democrats (SD)                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Citering:                                                           
              Olsson, Emma (2024) Political homogeneity in Sweden. Swedish National Election Stu-
              dies Working paper 2024:2. University of Gothenburg: Department of Political Science.
                                                                                  
              Redaktör för rapportserien:                                         
              Henrik Ekengren Oscarsson                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           1                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== sida 3 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Political     homogeneity             in                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Sweden                                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              EMMA OLSSON                                                         
              Statsvetenskapliga institutionen                                    
              Göteborgs universitet                                               
              Sammanfattning                                                      
              En del väljare befinner sig i ideologiskt homogena sociala sammanhang medan andra
              rör sig i miljöer där de hela tiden möter en stor variation av ideologiska uppfattningar.
              Graden av ideologisk homogenitet i olika väljargrupper i Sverige är emellertid dåligt
              kartlagt och vi vet litet om dess konsekvenser för väljarnas politiska intresse,
              kunskaper och deltagande. I den här rapporten kartläggs för första gången de svenska
              väljarnas ideologiska vänster-högeromgivning med utgångspunkt från deras egna
              bedömningar av i vilken mån vänster- respektive högeruppfattningar är dominerande i
              den egna familjen, bland grannar och vänner. Vi utvecklar nya mått på graden av
              social homogenitet och prövar hypoteser hämtade från teorier om ”homophily”1.
              Resultaten visar för det första att politisk homogenitet är som vanligast hos
              respondenter som placerar sig långt till vänster/höger på vänster-höger skalan samt hos
              konservativa respondenter med stark partiidentifikation. För det andra visar det sig
              att väljare som befinner sig i ideologiskt homog ena miljöer diskuterar politik mer
              hocahr oectth stoöcr rsea mpot litiskt intresse.                    
                                                                                  
              Summary                                                             
              Some voters find themselves in ideologically homogeneous social contexts, while others
              constantly encounter a wide variety of ideological views. The degree of ideological
              homogeneity in different voter groups in Sweden is poorly investigated and we know
              little about its consequences for voters' political interest, knowledge and political
              participation. The aim of this report is thus to, for the first time, investigate the left-
              right ideological environment of Swedish voters, based on their own assessments of the
              extent to which left- and right-wing views are dominant in their own family, among
              neighbors and friends. We develop new measures of political homogeneity and test
              hypotheses derived from theories of homophily. First, the results show that political
              homogeneity is most common among respondents who place themselves far left/right
              on the left-right scale and among conservative respondents with strong party
              identification. Second, voters in ideologically homogeneous environments are found to
              discuss politics more and have a greater political interest.        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              1 There is no appropriate Swedish translation for homophily.        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           1                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 4 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Introduction                                                        
              Humans are social beings meaning that we both seek the company of others and are
              significantly affected by the company of others (Rogers & Bhowmik 1970).
              Accordingly, scholars often look at the organizational level to explain variations in
              individual behavior as these are intertwined. The analysis of the interplay between
              individuals and their social circumstances has its roots within social psychology,
              however the results have had implications for various fields of research. For example,
              as famously expressed by sociologist Paul Lazarsfeld, “social circumstances determine
              political preferences” (Lazarsfeld et.al. 1944). The social circumstances of an
              individual and which groups she belongs to are believed to influence how she thinks
              and behaves politically.                                            
               On that note, there are several different theories within social psychology that all
              explain various aspects of the interplay between individuals and groups. The theory of
              homophily is perhaps one of the most famous and well accepted theories among
              scholars which describes how these relationships are formed. According to the theory
              of homophily, people are drawn to others with whom they perceive to have much in
              common with, resulting in groups of people that are homogenic (McPhersen, Smith-
              Lovin & Cook 2001). There are two types of homophily – homophily of own choice
              and induced homophily. The first one, homophily of own choice, represents those cases
              where individuals actively choose similar people to interact with, and the latter refers
              to a more subtle process in which homophily emerges because of other factors (Huber
              & Malhotra 2017). The theory thus assumes people seek out their similar others while
              also adopting the behavior of their surroundings further enhancing similarities (ibid).
              To exemplify, if you surround yourself with people who all enjoy watching football,
              you will most probably also start enjoying football. Furthermore, homophilous
              surroundings are believed to foster communication, trust, and solidarity (Kossinets,
              Watts 2009), and in line with this, it is reasonable to assume most people worldwide
              find themselves within homogenous surroundings.                     
               People evaluate their similarities based on several different factors, for example,
              ethnicity, age, and gender (McPhersen, Smith-Lovin & Cook 2001). More recently
              though, scholars have also started to investigate political homophily – defined as the
              tendency to engage more with politically similar people (Huber & Malhotra 2017).
              Such papers have thus aimed towards revealing whether political similarities constitute
              a major point of evaluation for individuals when deciding whom to communicate and
              socialize with, in addition to earlier mentioned characteristics. According to Gregory
              A. Huber and Neil Malhotra (2017), there are three types of political homophily: (1)
              identity homophily, where individuals sort their surroundings based on political
              identities such as party identification or ideological identification, (2) issue homophily,
              where individuals base their evaluation of people on political issue positions and finally
              (3) engagement homophily, where individuals sort according to the level of political
              engagement. Out of these three types, identity homophily seem to be the strongest one
              which the authors explain by referring to the early development of such identities and
              their persistence throughout life (ibid).                           
               Studies on political homophily, or identity homophily, have for the most part been
              conducted in the U.S and the results should thus be considered as somewhat biased
              towards that context. Additionally, many scholars, such as Michael Chan (2018) and
              Gregory A. Huber & Neil Malthora (2017), have focused on explaining political
              homophily online, for example on twitter and on online-dating apps. 
               In this report the Swedish electorate will instead become the unit of analysis
              broadening the current field of research. For the latest election survey conducted in
              2022, new questions were added about the political identity of respondents’
              surroundings, facilitating the study of homogeneity within the Swedish electorate.
              Sweden is an interesting case to look at when it comes to political homophily as
              scholars have shown the electorate to be relatively volatile (Oscarsson 2018). A volatile
                                                                                  
                                           2                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 5 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              electorate could be an indication of heterogeneity because if individuals regularly
              change political opinions, groups of people should be more heterogenic politically.
              Political homophily might therefore be less prevalent in Sweden. Also, Sweden is an
              interesting case as it differs a lot from the U.S with regards to the political system.
               All in all, the aim of this paper is to analyze the level of homogeneity in a Swedish
              context, in light of previous research on political homophily. Given the theory of
              political homophily one would expect that most individuals live within surroundings
              that are politically homogenous, however, with regards to the volatile aspect of the
              Swedish electorate there is also reason to believe heterogeneity to be more widespread.
              Two research questions will become the point of focus forward, namely:
               1) among whom in Sweden is political homogeneity most common and   
               2) what are the consequences of being part of politically homogenous surroundings,
               for the individual?                                                
                                                                                  
              In light of the two research questions, the purpose of this paper is of both a descriptive
              and exploratory nature. The results will contribute to a better understanding of
              political homophily and hopefully shed more light onto differences between levels of
              homogeneity. Additionally, the contribution will also be of methodological nature as a
              new measurement will be constructed and simultaneously tested, based on the new
              questions from the Swedish National Election Study. In the first part of this paper,
              definitions and measurements will be discussed, which lay the foundation forward.
              Secondly, previous research on homophily is presented from which it is possible to
              derive hypotheses regarding the first research question. In the final part, individual
              consequences of political homogeneity is presented followed by a concluding discussion
              about implications and future research.                             
                                                                                  
              Political homogeneity – definitions and measurements                
              In order to analyze homogeneity across different groups of voters in Sweden and its
              consequences, it is first necessary to discuss definitions and measurements. A proper
              operationalization of political homogeneity is vital to ensure high validity. Political
              homogeneity will in this paper be understood as a direct result of political homophily
              which could be explained as the process through which homogeneity is established. If
              indeed political homophily explain how social groups are formed, then these groups
              should also be homogenous. Conversely, where political homogeneity is strong it is
              reasonable to assume political homophily has played a major role.   
               Referring to a group of people as homogenous is equivalent to saying that everyone
              included in the group is similar to the other – there is no difference between people
              with regards to certain characteristics/factors, and the opposite would be true in a
              heterogenous group. In light of this, referring to political homogeneity, there would be
              no distance between individuals in a group on certain political factors. Finding a
              proper measurement for homogeneity, operationalized as the degree of similarity-
              /difference, is both dependent upon what data is being used and how the variables are
              coded.                                                              
               At our disposal from the 2022 election survey in Sweden we have questions about
              where respondents would place their family, friends, and neighbors on a left-right
              scale, as illustrated by table one. Organizing one’s family, friends, and neighbors on a
              left-right scale captures what Huber and Malhotra referred to as identity homophily
              (2017). For respondents whose surroundings are characterized by high political
              homogeneity (identity homogeneity) there should be virtually no distance of political
              identities between people inside the groups whereas for respondents whose
              surroundings are characterized by political heterogeneity the distance should be large.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           3                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 6 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
               In this report, respondents’ surroundings will thus be understood as their family,
              friends, and neighbors and political homogeneity will, based on table one, be
              operationalized as having almost no distance of political identities within ones
              surrounding.                                                        
                                                                                  
              Table 1  Distribution of political identities within respondents’ surroundings.
                                                                                  
                       (1)    (2)    (3)   (4)    (5)    (6)                      
                      Almost Somewhat     Somewhat Almost                         
                     everyone to more to the As many at more to the everyone to   
                      the left left both sides right the right Do not know n      
              Family   253    352   461    359    429    260    2 114             
                      (12%)  (17%)  (22%)  (17%)  (20%)  (12%) (100%)             
              Friends  127    322   540    470    250    386    2 095             
                      (6%)   (15%)  (26%)  (22%)  (12%)  (19%) (100%)             
              Neighbors 29    139   343    321    134    1 127  2 093             
                      (1%)   (7%)   (17%)  (15%)  (6%)   (54%) (100%)             
              Family   277    390   598    406    443     -     2 114             
                      (13%)  (19%)  (28%)  (19%)  (21%)        (100%)             
                                                                                  
              Friends  165    388   728    538    276     -     2 095             
                      (8%)   (18%)  (35%)  (26%)  (13%)        (100%)             
              Neighbors 145   363   781    576    228     -     2 093             
                      (7%)   (17%)  (37%)  (28%)  (11%)        (100%)             
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
                                                                                  
              Comment: The data is collected using the survey question "When you think of people in your environment, approximately how many are on the left or
              right side of politics?". The option “almost everyone to the left” is coded as 1; the option “somewhat more to the left” is coded as 2; the option “as many
              at both sides” is coded as 3, the option “somewhat more to the right” is coded as 4 and finally, the option “almost everyone to the right” is coded as 5.
              The parentheses show the percentage of respondents within each category. The “Family” variable is called “q15a” in the dataset; the “Friends” variable is
              called “q15b” in the dataset and the “Neighbors” variable is called “q15c” in the dataset. All results have been weighted against the official 2022 election
              result. The sixth category contains respondents who have answered that they don´t know where to place their family, friends and/or neighbors, and
              respondents who have checked two options instead of one and finally also respondents who have skipped the whole question.
              In the table above, all three variables are summarized. Respondents have had the
              opportunity to place their family, friends, and neighbors according to the alternatives
              shown by the first row. The first alternative “almost everyone to the left” is equivalent
              to a value of one whereas the second last alternative “almost everyone to the right” is
              equivalent to a value of five. For both these alternatives there is almost no distance of
              political identities whereas alternative three, “as many at both sides”, imply a larger
              distance of opinions. Earlier in the survey, respondents were asked where they would
              place all parties, and themselves, on a left-right scale from zero to ten. Having this
              question before asking about respondent’s surroundings enables them to think about
              the meaning of left and right, and what parties they themselves would place on either
              side. Statistics concerning this question can be found in the appendix where it is made
              clear that most respondents have a similar perception of how political parties are
              placed along the left-right scale. This is relevant to keep in mind even though the focus
              of this paper is on political identities rather than political parties, because this goes to
              show that even in a more volatile electorate political parties and political identities are
              very much intertwined. Identifying as either left or right oftentimes also means
              identifying with a particular set of political parties.             
               Furthermore, worth mentioning is that all answers are based upon respondents’
              perceptions of their own surroundings which is important to remember throughout the
              paper as there is a significant difference between actual political views and the
              perception of someone else’s views. Nevertheless, for the purpose of this paper it is
              rather appropriate that all answers are based upon individual perceptions because
                                           4                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 7 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              actual political views are more difficult to measure and because we are interested in
              how individuals adapt their behavior based on how they view their surroundings.
               As shown in the sixth column, there is a substantial amount of people who do not
              know or have a clear perception of where their family, friends or neighbors place
              themselves on the left-right scale. Even though this seems to be true across all three
              variables, it is especially apparent for the last group, neighbors. Over half of the
              respondents answered that they did not know how their neighbors would place
              themselves politically. In comparison to the other two groups this is perhaps not such a
              surprising result as most people feel closer to their family and friends compared to their
              neighbors. Nevertheless, if excluding the “do not know” alternative from the analysis
              the number of respondents will drop resulting in less useful and generalizable results.
              Consequently, going forward with the variables, the “do not know” alternative for
              family, friends and, neighbors will be equated to a respondents own left-right
              placement, as we would expect there to be no effect if respondents do not know where
              to place their surroundings. These changes are illustrated by the fourth, fifth and sixth
              row in table one.                                                   
               There are a number of ways in which these variables can be used to measure the
              phenomena of interest. Mentioned earlier, the measurement is important to ensure high
              validity and it is thus essential that the measurement follow the definition of
              homogeneity as having no distance of political identities. Additionality, for simplicity
              and reliability, the chosen measurement should also be applicable to both parts of the
              paper. In other words, the chosen measurement should be useful in analyzing both
              homogeneity across different groups of voters and its consequences. 
               One way to go about measuring homogeneity would be to use the standard
              deviation of all variables combined. Higher values would then imply a greater distance
              of political identities and thus more heterogeneity. This measurement was dismissed
              because of several reasons. First, as higher values indicate more distance of political
              identities this measurement rather capture the level of heterogeneity than the level of
              homogeneity and even though these could be seen as each other’s opposites, using such
              a measurement risk harming the validity and reliability of the paper. Additionally,
              using the standard deviation of all variables combined is misleading because such a
              measurement treats all options for the three variables equally. In any other given case
              this is desired, however as option number three: “as many at both sides” implies
              heterogeneity is should not be treated like the other options. To exemplify, when using
              the standard deviation measurement respondents who placed both their family, friends,
              and neighbors at both sides politically (option number three) would receive the lowest
              value indicating full homogeneity when that in fact is not the case. The same problem
              appeared when trying similar measurements based on the difference between variables.
              For example, we tried subtracting the value for family with that of friends and so on
              for family, friends, and neighbors. The absolute values of the calculated differences
              were then added together resulting in a value between zero and eight. Zero implied no
              distance of political identities within respondents’ surroundings. Yet again, this
              measurement did not take into account the meaning of the third variable category.
               Consequently, using the differences between all variables as a way of measuring level
              of homogeneity has not proven to be useful in this case. Instead, the most proper
              measurement to use illustrates homogeneity in the form of a scale ranging from zero to
              one based on the mean value of all variables combined. The measurement is
              constructed by first recoding all five categories into the following three: “a majority to
              the left”, “as many at both sides” and “a majority to the right” (see appendix). These
              categories are then given individual values where “a majority to the left” is equivalent
              to a value of minus one, “as many at both sides” is equivalent to a value of 0 and “a
              majority to the right” is equivalent to a value of one. Secondly, these three variables
              are combined to form a measurement by calculating the absolute mean value of all
              variables. Receiving a value of zero implies a maximum spread of political identities
                                                                                  
                                           5                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 8 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              and these respondents are thus part of heterogeneous surroundings. There are two
              possible combinations of political identities that result in full heterogeneity, namely if
              respondents place both their family, friends, and neighbors at both sides of the left-
              right scale ((0+0+0)/3) or if there is a combination of one, zero and minus one.
              Theoretically, this would be the same as saying 50 percent of ones surrounding has a
              left-wing political identity whereas the other 50 percent place themselves somewhere to
              the right. The highest value, one, represents full homogeneity and this is achieved for
              respondents who place their entire surrounding (family, friends, and neighbors) either
              to the left or to the right ((1+1+1)/3). In between zero and one there are two additional
              categories, one somewhat more homogeneous and the other somewhat more
              heterogenous. The formula used to produce this measure is shown below together with
              examples of combinations. Figure one illustrates how the Swedish electorate is
              distributed along the measurement.                                  
               Gen measurement = abs(family + friends + neighbors)/3              
                                                                                  
               abs(-1 + -1 + -1)/3 = 1                                            
                                                                                  
               abs(0 + 1 + -1)/3 = 0                                              
                                                                                  
               abs(0 + 1 + 1)/3 = 0,66                                            
               abs(0 + 0 + 1)/3 = 0,33                                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Figure 1 Level of homogeneity within the Swedish electorate 2022 (percent)
                                                                                  
                 35                                                               
                                                            32                    
                 30                                                               
                                     26                                           
                 25                                                               
                         21                      21                               
                 20                                                               
                                                                                  
                 15                                                               
                                                                                  
                 10                                                               
                                                                                  
                  5                                                               
                                                                                  
                  0                                                               
                        0,00        0,33        0,66        1,00                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The figure presents an index for political homogeneity ranging from 0 to 1 where 1 equals full political homogeneity. From the figure it is
              possible to find out how many percentages of Swedish respondents, who simultaneously answered the questions presented in table one, find themselves
              within politically homogeneous or heterogenous surroundings.        
                                                                                  
              Figure one shows that Swedish respondents are part of both homogenous and
              heterogenous surroundings, even though homogeneity seem to be more common. The
              fourth bar shows that 32 percent of all respondents are within fully homogenous
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           6                                      
                STNEDNOPSER                                                       
                FO                                                                
                EGATNECREP                                                        
                                     POLITICAL HOMOGENEITY                        

===== sida 9 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              surroundings where a majority of both family, friends, and neighbors are placed at the
              same side of the left-right scale. Heterogeneity is less common, accounting for 21
              percent of the Swedish respondents, however perhaps more common than what would
              have been expected if assuming political homophily is widespread.   
               Given that there are many different potential measurements for political
              homogeneity, the chosen one is not without its limitations. First, what should be
              mentioned is that the measurement does not differentiate between degrees of left-
              wing/right-wing identity. Consequently, respondents who find themselves within fully
              homogenous environments might be surrounded by some very far right voters, and
              some more towards the middle. This would have been interesting to capture as well,
              however since the questions are formulated in a way that excludes degrees of left-
              wing/right-wing political identities, it is not possible to do so. On a similar note, one
              might also argue that some information is lost when merging the two categories to the
              left and the two categories to the right, going from five categories to three. In so doing,
              no differentiation is made between surroundings where almost everyone is placed on
              one side and surroundings where somewhat more is placed on one side. The correct
              term to be used instead is that a majority of respondents surroundings are placed at
              either side. The main reason for recoding all variables accordingly is because of
              simplicity. In doing so, the measurement is both easier to use and easier to understand
              which is favorable when constructing an entirely new measurement. In future research
              it will be possible to develop the measurement by including more interesting elements.
               Moreover, one might also react to the fact that respondents own left-right placement
              is not included in the measurement. On the one hand, some might argue that by
              ignoring respondents own left-right placements the analysis will not be able to
              contribute to the field of political homophily, as this theory assumes people choosing
              company based on their own views. On the other hand though, there are also many
              valid reasons for excluding respondents own left-right placement from the
              measurement. First, as the aim of this paper is to explain individual outcomes by
              looking at group (organizational level) factors such as homogeneity, it makes sense to
              exclude individual factors from the organizational side of the analysis. Including
              respondents own left-right placement would go beyond the specified research question
              of this paper. Secondly, considering previous research on political homophily, we
              would expect that respondents who find themselves within homogenous surroundings
              also agree politically with the dominating political identity. This is also confirmed
              statistically when comparing respondents own left-right placement with that of their
              surroundings - there are very few respondents who find themselves within
              surroundings where they themselves deviate much from the dominating political
              identity (see appendix)2. Lastly, since the variable for respondents own ideological
              placement is coded differently from the variables measuring surrounding ideological
              placement, combining these would be difficult.                      
               Finally, there is also reason to question whether all variables included in the
              measurement - family, friends, and neighbors, should be treated equally. Family and
              friends should probably have a greater impact on the individual in comparison to
              neighbors, however this is not taken into account in the measurement. Also, family is
              different from friends and neighbors in the sense that individuals in most cases do not
              choose who is part of their family. Hence, part of the political homophily theory
              focusing on how individuals choose their surroundings, in not as relevant in the case of
              family. Nevertheless, as it is also proposed in the theory that individuals adopt the
              behavior and thoughts of the people they surround themselves with, family is still a
              2 Based on the results from appendix it is reasonable to exclude own left-right placement. If there would have been
              a significant amount of people deviating much from the rest of their surrounding such an occasion would have
              been interesting and necessary to analyze deeper. However, since that is not the case own left-right position is
              excluded.                                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           7                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 10 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              relevant group to analyze. These final limitations will be discussed further in the
              concluding part of the paper.                                       
                                                                                  
              Political homogeneity – among whom?                                 
              In political science scholars frequently analyze whether a phenomenon is particularly
              common for a specific group of voters and accordingly, that will be the aim of the
              following section of the paper. More so to the point, in light of the results from figure
              one showing the distribution of respondents along the measurement, who would we
              expect to find within surroundings characterized by high political homogeneity? In
              order to answer this question and formulate appropriate hypotheses, previous research
              relating to political homophily, and other sociological theories will be used. The aim is
              to describe whether and which innate/immutable factors, socio-economic factors and
              political factors have an impact on political homogeneity.          
               According to political scientists Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris (2017) attitudes
              and behavior differ between people in society depending on their relative feeling of
              security. The feeling of security makes people more tolerant towards outgroups and
              more open towards new ideas whereas insecurity has the reversed effect (ibid).
              Inglehart and Norris also hypothesize among whom the sense of insecurity is strongest,
              namely among the less educated, the older generation, the ethnic majority and among
              men (ibid). There are several explanations as to why these groups in particular
              experience more insecurity, however, to summarize one could refer to the global
              revolution. Globalization has led to a more multicultural, progressive society with
              higher economic growth which seem to have benefited some more than others, the so-
              called winners of globalization (Harteveld 2016). Besides the importance of
              generational, educational, ethnical and gender-based divides, residential divides are
              also important here. Bigger cities generally attract more people from various parts of
              the world due to better job opportunities and salaries, among many things, which in
              turn result in a more diverse environment (Ford & Jennings 2020). For the same
              reason, one might also expect the winner of globalization to be found within larger
              cities where there are greater opportunities (ibid). Individuals living in larger cities
              should thus also be more open towards dissimilarities because they are constantly
              surrounded by them. On the contrary, individuals living in smaller, rural cities, with
              less multiculturalism, should be more skeptical towards outgroups and feel more
              insecure in the face of cultural diversity. Hence, for those who feel more insecure with
              regards to the cultural diversity, economic competition, supranational political
              integration, and modernization, political homophily and in turn homogeneity, should
              be stronger because these people are generally less tolerant towards outgroups and less
              open towards new ideas. From this section, both innate/immutable and socioeconomic
              factors have been highlighted and we thus arrive at the following hypotheses:
              H1: Factors of immutable character explain the variation in level of political
              homogeneity between respondents’ surroundings.                      
               H1a: The level of political homogeneity is higher among older than among younger
               voters.                                                            
               H1b: The level of political homogeneity is higher among ethnic majority voters than
               among ethnic minority voters.                                      
                                                                                  
               H1c: The level of political homogeneity is higher among men than among women.
                                                                                  
               H1d: The level of political homogeneity is higher among rural residential voters than
               among urban residential voters.                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           8                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 11 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              H2: Factors of socioeconomic character explain the variation in level of political
              homogeneity between respondents’ surroundings.                      
                                                                                  
               H2a: The level of political homogeneity is higher among less educated voters than
               among highly educated voters.                                      
               H2b: The level of political homogeneity is higher among working class voters than
               among upper class voters.                                          
                                                                                  
               H2c: The level of political homogeneity is higher among low-income voters than
               among high-income voters.                                          
                                                                                  
              Furthermore, a similar argument about security is put forth by Andrei Boutyline and
              Robb Willer (2016). They conclude that political homophily is strongest among two
              types of voters, namely conservative voters, and ideologically extreme voters (2016).
              Conservative voters are found on the right side of the left-right scale whereas
              ideologically extreme voters are found at both ends of the scale. Boutyline and Willer
              base part of their argumentation on the so-called uncertainty-threat hypothesis which
              conclude that an unknown situation is perceived differently by people depending on
              their preferences for certainty (ibid). In line with this, previous research has shown that
              conservative voters have a stronger preference for certainty with regards to their
              traditional view and unwelcome attitude towards change (ibid). On the other hand, for
              more liberal voters who rather see change as something good, the level of threat is not
              perceived to be as high when faced with something new/unknown (ibid). Consequently,
              conservative voters are expected to associate more with their similar others, optimizing
              certainty and minimizing potential threats and disagreements. Furthermore, Boutyline
              and Willer also refer to the uncertainty-identity theory in explaining why ideologically
              extreme voters seek political homophily (ibid). Yet again, the feeling of certainty is an
              important factor where group identification is believed to reduce the level of
              uncertainty. The identity of a group specifies something similar to a guidebook of how
              the individual should act and who is welcome within the group. For people with a
              stronger preference for certainty, a distinct group identification should be more
              important which is more common at the ideological extremes (ibid). Not only are
              ideologically extreme voters automatically further away from their dissimilar others,
              but the level of uncertainty would also increase if socializing with people outside the
              group as one would not have the safety of a behavioral guidebook anymore.
               With reference to group identification, partisanship and political polarization are
              also important theories/phenomena to mention in this context. Partisanship, as used
              and explained in the Swedish election survey, describes the individual tendency to
              strongly identify with a political party. The identification is thus usually with a
              political party rather than with a political identity. However, as explained in the earlier
              section about measurements and definitions, respondents often have a clear view of
              where political parties are to be placed on a left-right scale and most have a similar
              view regarding this matter. Accordingly, a strong identification with a specific party
              most likely also entail identification with a political identity as either left or right.
              Definitions aside, we can look to the field of political polarization to understand how
              the level of partisanship affect the level of homogeneity.          
               According to Emma A. Renström, Hanna Bäck och Yvonne Schmeisser (2020),
              stronger individual identification with a political party, a group or an ideology result in
              individuals being more protective of their own affiliation and more skeptical towards
              outgroups. A strongly politically polarized society describes a society with increasing
              political disagreements (ibid). To some extent, political polarization is welcome and
              even necessary for a well-functioning democracy, however political polarization also
              risk hurting democracy when disagreements lead to hostile feelings towards outgroups
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                           9                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 12 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              rather than healthy debates (Oscarsson, Bergman, Bergström & Hellström 2021).
              Political polarization thus risk creating a stronger sense of “us-vs-them”, or ingroups
              vs outgroups, a feeling more common among partisan voters (Renström, Bäck &
              Schmeisser 2020). Therefore, it should be expected that political homogeneity is
              stronger among partisan voters as they are more skeptical towards outgroups. In this
              section a variety of political factors have been highlighted all of which are expected to
              explain the development of politically homogenous environments. Additionally, as the
              focus of this paper is on political homogeneity it is also reasonable to assume these
              factors to be of particular importance in comparison to the earlier mentioned factors.
              From this section the following hypotheses are formulated:          
              H3: Factors of political character are especially important for understanding the
              variation in level of political homogeneity between respondents’ surroundings.
                                                                                  
               H3a: The level of political homogeneity is higher among conservative voters than
               among liberal voters.                                              
                                                                                  
               H3b: The level of political homogeneity is higher among ideologically extreme voters
               than among voters in the middle.                                   
                                                                                  
               H3c: The level of political homogeneity is higher among partisan voters than among
               non-partisan voters.                                               
              To summarize, in this section both innate/immutable factors, socio-economic factors
              and political factors have been discussed. Common innate/immutable factors brought
              up in previous research are the following: age, ethnicity, gender, and residential area.
              Socioeconomic factors refer to education, social class and income. And finally, political
              factors discussed in previous research relate to ideological left-right position and
              partisanship. There seem to be two mechanisms in common driving the development of
              homogeneity, that is preferences for certainty and skepticism towards outgroups. A
              table is constructed illustrating how various groups of voters are distributed along the
              measurement. This will help clarify differences between groups of voters, however
              from such table it is not possible to confirm/reject the hypotheses and thus a regression
              analysis will also be performed and found in appendix.              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          10                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 13 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 3  Level of homogeneity across various groups of voters (percent)
                                 Low               High                           
                                0,00   0,33  0,66  1,00  Total     n              
                                                                                  
              Total              21    26    21     32    100    1 845            
              Age                                                                 
              18–22              21    26    26     27    100     64              
              23–30              18    33    21     28    100     159             
              31–40              19    29    20     32    100     268             
              41–50              17    30    20     33    100     323             
              51–60              19    27    22     32    100     358             
              61–70              25    21    21     33    100     395             
              71+                23    21    21     35    100     477             
              National background                                                 
              Swedish            19    26    22     33    100    1 619            
              Foreign            27    24    22     27    100     192             
              Gender                                                              
              Women              18    27    22     33    100    1 029            
              Men                23    24    21     32    100    1 015            
              Urban-rural                                                         
              Countryside        19    25    20     36    100     265             
              Small town         23    26    22     29    100     340             
              City/larger urban area 18 26   23     33    100     861             
              Stockholm, Gothenburg, Malmö 18 29 21 32    100     336             
              Education                                                           
              Primary school     32    23    18     27    100     219             
              Secondary school   20    26    21     33    100     677             
              Post secondary education 17 28 22     33    100     953             
              Class                                                               
              Working class      23    28    18     31    100     661             
              Middle class       19    26    24     31    100     830             
              Upper class        13    22    28     37    100     320             
              Income                                                              
              < 187 000 kr       26    20    19     36    100     132             
              187 000 – 310 000kr 21   31    20     28    100     245             
              310 000 – 556 000kr 22   25    20     33    100     607             
              556 000 – 778 000kr 18   24    27     31    100     423             
              > 778 000kr        13    28    24     36    100     401             
              Own ideological placement3                                          
              Far left           9     24    20     47    100     195             
              Somewhat left      13    27    23     37    100     403             
              Neither            41    33    19     7     100     732             
              Somewhat right     9     19    26     46    100     519             
              Far right          6     15    19     60    100     195             
              Partisanship                                                        
              Partisan voter     16    23    22     39    100     506             
              Non-partisan voter 22    26    22     30    100    1 301            
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: Table 3 shows how political homogeneity vary between different voter groups in Sweden 2022. All results have been weighted against the
              official 2022 election result and all results are presented as percentages. Voter groups with less than 30 respondents have been excluded from the table or
              combined with other categories.                                     
              3 See appendix for information on how level of homogeneity vary between respondents depending on party vote.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          11                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 14 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 3 show the level of political homogeneity within specific voter groups in Sweden.
              Each voter group will be discussed in the following section from which it will be
              possible to either reject or confirm the earlier presented hypotheses.
               The first voter groups to be presented are different age groups, from first-time voters
              to voters over 71 years. As shown in the second column, there is a slight increase of
              homogeneity between first-time voters and the older age groups indicating that the
              level of homogeneity is stronger for older voters as stated in H1a. For 27 percent of
              first-time voters there is political homogeneity, however as we move up an age category
              the percentage increase until we reach the final category of 71+ respondents where
              political homogeneity is a fact for 35 percent. This initial overview thus points to age
              being indicative of political homogeneity, however, the regression results presented in
              the appendix tell a contradicting story; the effect of age on homogeneity is not
              significant and it is thus not possible to confirm H1a.             
               Moreover, the results for national background give slight support to hypothesis 1b.
              Respondents who belong to the ethnic majority, Swedish, seem on average to be more
              homogenous in comparison to ethnic minority respondents with a difference of six
              percent. Also, the second column shows that heterogeneity is more common among
              ethnic minority respondents further substantiating the claim. Thereto, the effect is also
              confirmed in the regression results where national background has a significant effect
              on level of political homogeneity confirming H1b. Gender, on the other hand, does not
              seem to be a strong indicator of homogeneity as the difference between men and
              women is neglectable which is also confirmed by the insignificant regression results.
              Consequently, H1c must be rejected.                                 
               The results for residential area are similar to those of gender. The difference in
              homogeneity between areas of residence is not substantial, however homogeneity does
              seem to be most common among respondents living on the countryside and weaker for
              respondents living in bigger cities. What does contradict the hypothesis is that the
              lowest level of homogeneity is found for small town respondents (see column five) and
              the lowest level of heterogeneity is found for respondents living in Stockholm,
              Gothenburg, or Malmö (see column two). As thus expected, the regression results also
              show the relationship between residential area and homogeneity to be insignificant
              rejecting H1d. Altogether, the results from table three only confirm H1b leading one
              to believe innate/immutable factors might not be as important for the development of
              political homogeneity as earlier expected.                          
               Moving on to the second hypothesis highlighting socioeconomic factors. Overall,
              both educational background, income and class appear to be somewhat meaningless
              factors for the development of homogeneity and the results rather point in the opposite
              direction of the hypothesis. For each of the variables, homogeneity is less common for
              the groups highlighted in the hypothesis. Further analytical depth is provided in the
              regression analysis where educational level is the only socioeconomic factor with a
              significant relationship to level of homogeneity. Nevertheless, as indicated by table
              three, higher educational background rather seems to be related to higher level of
              political homogeneity. Consequently, the socioeconomic factors presented in H2 all
              have to be rejected because the relationships are either insignificant or as in the case of
              education, the relationship is positive rather than negative.       
               Finally, there are two factors left in table three relating to H3. First, for ideological
              placement it is possible to distinguish a homogeneity u-curve. What is meant by this is
              that the level of homogeneity is strongest at the ends and weakest in the middle which
              graphically would be illustrated in the form of the letter “u”. Far-right voters exhibit
              the highest level of homogeneity (60 percent) across all groups of voters, followed by
              far-left voters (47 percent) and voters who place themselves in the middle of the left-
              right scale exhibit the lowest level of homogeneity (7 percent) across all voter groups.
              Moreover, heterogeneity is strongest for voters in the middle (41 percent) which should
              be expected from previous research on homophily, as there is greater certainty in
                                                                                  
                                          12                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 15 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              surrounding oneself with heterogenous people if oneself identifies somewhat with both
              sides. These are all interesting results as they go in line with H3. Since right-wing
              voters are generally more conservative these results do indicate that homogeneity is
              more common among conservatives and the u-shaped curve of homogeneity indicate
              that homogeneity is strongest for ideologically extreme voters. Table three together
              with the regression results show that there is a significant relationship between
              ideological placement and political homogeneity confirming both H3a and H3b.
               Lastly, partisan voters are also more homogenous (39 percent) in comparison to
              non-partisan voters (30 percent) which also is confirmed by the regression table in the
              appendix. Yet again, these results go in line with the claims that was presented in the
              third hypothesis, namely H3c.                                       
               To conclude this first section, we expect to find far-right voters, ideologically
              extreme voters, partisan voters, highly educated voters and ethnic majority voters
              within homogenous surroundings. This points to the fact that political factors, as
              suggested in the third hypothesis, are of greater importance for the development of
              politically homogenous surroundings as opposed to immutable and socioeconomic
              factors.                                                            
              Political homogeneity – consequences                                
              In the previous section, political homogeneity was analyzed as a dependent variable
              where several different individual characteristics were included as independent
              variables. The hypothesizes were derived from previous research on political
              homophily and other strains of research in relation to preference for certainty.
              Moreover, in the following section the focus will shift from explaining the development
              of homogeneity, to explain its consequences. Focusing on the consequences of political
              homogeneity means that the consequences also should be of a political nature. Yet
              again, previous research on political homophily will constitute a base for hypothesis
              formulation, together with previous research on the spiral of silence theory.
               In the article “What does homophily do? A review of the consequences of
              homophily” (2022), researchers Gokhan Ertug, Julia Brennecke, Balázs and Tengjian
              Zou aim towards identifying various consequences of homophily. There seem to be
              two directions in the literature regarding the effects, one highlighting the more positive
              effects and one focusing one the more negative ones. First, homophily is believed to
              promote communication, trust, and coordination which, going back to the intro-
              duction, also is one of the main reasons for the development of homophily (Ertug,
              et.al. 2022). These factors have also been brought up by many other scholars who
              particularly emphasize the degree of effectiveness in communication between
              individuals within homophilous surroundings (Rogers & Bhowmik 1970). Effective
              communication, trust and coordination are all intertwined, for example, if assuming
              individuals trust their similar others more, communication and coordination should
              both be easier and more effective. Furthermore, this has proven to be especially
              relevant for political communication because people tend to avoid discussing politics
              when they foresee disagreements (Gerber, Huber, Doherty & Dowling 2012), and as
              there should be more disagreement in heterogenous surroundings it is reasonable to
              assume people within such environments avoid political discussions. 
               Nonetheless, homophily is also believed by many to reduce diversity in knowledge,
              perspective, and resources, highlighting the more negative effects (Ertug, Brennecke,
              Kovács & Zou 2022). Scholars have for example investigated the level of homogeneity
              vs heterogeneity within groups and how each affect group performance. According to
              Sujin K. Horwitz and Irwin B. Horwitz (2007), diversity within groups result in a more
              versatile pool of knowledge for the individual which in turn help foster creativity and
              problem solving. So far, most highlighted results are collected from previous research
              on homophily without the political specification which is applied in this paper. To
              assess the possible consequences on a political, level one might have to look beyond
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          13                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 16 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              previous literature on homophily and see to other theories within both sociology and
              political science.                                                  
               The spiral of silence is a classical theory within political science concentrating on
              individual perceptions of the political opinion. According to the theory, majority
              opinion direct individuals in their own opinion formation, and where the individual
              risk diverging from the majority they tend to agree or simply stay quite (Noelle-
              Neumann 1974). This theory is mostly used to describe opinion formation on a larger
              scale, for example amongst an entire population and would thus explain why minority
              opinions stay unpopular. Still, the theory should also be applicable in cases where the
              group being analyzed in smaller, such as individual surroundings. Applying the spiral
              of silence to the case presented in this paper could mean that if individuals are part of
              very homogenous surroundings (there is a clear majority opinion), they might agree
              more in general or refrain from voicing opinions in fear of being in minority.
              Presumably, this could be the case even if individuals are part of surroundings that
              match their own ideological left-right position because the fear of becoming a minority
              will still be present. And, even if the individual political identity match that of ones
              surrounding (which has proven to be the case for most) there is still a possibility that
              an individual diverges from her surrounding on certain issues.      
               Even though many scholars highlight the silencing effect of homogeneity in research
              on the spiral of silence theory, many more find contrasting evidence. For example, as it
              might be harder to assess what the majority opinion is in a heterogenic environment
              (there might not be a majority opinion), individuals may sensor themselves as a
              precaution (Chan 2018). To quote journalism - and communication scholar Michael
              Chan […] there is greater certainty in homophilous networks, which better facilitates
              the scanning of the opinion climate” (ibid). The spiral of silence thus also highlights the
              positive effect of homophily on communication, or rather the negative effect of
              heterogeneity.                                                      
               Conversely, previous research highlight both positive and negative effect of
              homophily on individual behavior and, to some extent even contradictory. Yet, for the
              purpose of this report, two hypotheses will be formulated each of which relate to one
              of the commonly mentioned effects in previous research, namely: communication and
              knowledge.                                                          
              H4: Political homogeneity positively affect individual participation in political
              discussions.                                                        
              H5: Political homogeneity negatively affect the level of individual political knowledge.
                                                                                  
              In addition to these hypotheses, another one will also be tested regarding political
              interest. Political interest is added on the same grounds as political communication,
              even though it is not explicitly mentioned in previous research. If assuming political
              homophily is true, and that people choose homogenous environments to facilitate
              communication, coordination, and trust, it would also be reasonable to assume such
              environments foster political interest more than environments where individuals feel
              less tempted to talk about politics.                                
              H6: Political homogeneity positively affect individual political interest.
                                                                                  
              In total, three dependent variables will be tested. Individual participation in political
              discussions is measured on a scale from one to four where higher values indicate more
              participation. The measurement is based on respondents own perception of their
              participation. Political knowledge is measured using a scale from zero to four where,
              again, higher values imply greater political knowledge. This variable is constructed by
              combining a variety of different variables relating to political knowledge. Respondents
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          14                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 17 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              were asked questions with a clear right and wrong answer, and these were then
              combined to form a measurement of political knowledge. Finally, political interest is
              measured in the same way as political discussions where individual perception also lay
              the foundation.                                                     
              Table 4  Bivariate and multivariate regression results for the relationships between
                       homogeneity and participation in political discussions, political
                       knowledge, and political interest.                         
                                                                                  
                         Political communication Political knowledge Political interest
                        Bivariate Multiple Bivariate Multiple Bivariate Multiple  
                          (1)    (2)     (3)     (4)    (5)     (6)               
              Homogeneity 0,229*** 0,169*** 0,340*** 0,158 0,183*** 0,129**       
                         (0,048) (0,052) (0,081) (0,087) (0,042) (0,044)          
                                                                                  
              Ideological       -0,011         0,102***         0,016             
              placement         (0,018)         (0,029)        (0,016)            
                                                                                  
              Age               -0,005***      0,019***        0,004***           
                                (0,001)         (0,002)        (0,001)            
              Partisanship      -0,226***       -0,168*        -0,405***          
                                (0,044)         (0,055)        (0,039)            
                                                                                  
              National          -0,017         -0,291**         0,027             
              background        (0,062)         (0,102)        (0,054)            
                                                                                  
              Educational       0,252***       -0,539***       0,205***           
              background        (0,029)         (0,049)        (0,026)            
                                                                                  
              Intercept 3,083*** 3,198*** 2,084*** 0,160 2,787*** 2,749***        
                        (0,032) (0,154) (0,054) (0,272) (0,028) (0,145)           
                                                                                  
              Adjusted r2 0,011  0,082  0,008   0,121   0,009   0,106             
              Observations 2 031 1 630  2 044   1 640   2 070   1 654             
                                                                                  
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: Table 4 illustrates the relationship between the independent variable (political homogeneity) and three different dependent variables that have
              been collected based on previous research. These are: (1) respondents’ participation in political discussions (variable q13), (2) respondents’ level of political
              knowledge (variable v7712) and (3) respondents’ level of political interest (variable q4). For each dependent variable both a bivariate and a multiple
              regression has been conducted. Five controls are included in the multiple regression, namely ideological placement (from left to right), age, partisanship
              (dummy variable where nonpartisanship is being tested and partisanship is the reference category), national background (dummy variable where ethnic
              minority is being tested and ethnic majority is the reference category) and level of education (three level scale). The standard deviation for each result is
              shown in parentheses.                                               
              The results are summarized in table four. Column one and two illustrates the
              relationship between level of homogeneity and individual participation in political
              discussions. Both the bivariate and multiple results indicate that there is a positive
              relationship between homogeneity and political communication. The significant beta
              coefficient for the multiple model reveals that when the level of homogeneity increases
              with one step (according to the constructed measurement), individual participation in
              political discussions increase with 0,169 scale steps. There is thus a significant effect of
              the independent variable on the dependent variable even when including control
              variables. Also apparent is that the intercept value is high relative to the scale on which
              the dependent variable is measured. This means most respondents in the sample
              participate somewhat in political discussions even when there is full heterogeneity
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          15                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 18 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              within their surroundings, however homogeneity increases such behavior in accordance
              with the hypothesis. The adjusted r2 value implies that the proposed model explains 8,2
              percent of the variation in the dependent variable.                 
               Furthermore, the relationship between homogeneity and political knowledge is
              presented in column three and four. The beta coefficient for the bivariate model is
              positively significant however not for the multiple model indicating that there is no
              effect of political homogeneity on individual political knowledge when including
              control variables. It is thus not possible to draw any relevant conclusions regarding the
              relationship between political homogeneity and political knowledge based on this
              regression analysis and thus not either possible to confirm the fifth hypothesis. This
              could either be an indication of political homogeneity having no effect on political
              knowledge, or an indication that the measurement is not appropriate for this analysis.
              This will be further discussed in the conclusion.                   
               Finally, column five and six presents the relationship between homogeneity and
              individual political interest. The multiple beta coefficient for homogeneity is significant
              and the relationship is positive suggesting that when the level of homogeneity increase
              so does individual political interest with 0,129 scale steps. As with political
              communication, the value of the intercept is relatively high meaning that most
              respondents are fairly interested in politics even when surrounded by heterogeneity.
              This model explains 10,6 percent of the variation in the dependent variable and given
              the direction of the relationship the final hypothesis is supported.
               All in all, two of the three hypotheses regarding consequences are supported through
              the results presented in table four. To answer the second research question of this
              paper, the individual consequences of political homogeneity are: increasing
              participation in political discussions and increasing political interest. These two are
              most probably also relational as previous research often point to the fact that political
              interest leads to more communication which in turn leads to even more interest. In
              previous research both positive and negative effects of political homophily were
              highlighted however no negative consequences appeared in this investigation. Instead,
              the results gave indication of a positive relationship between homogeneity and political
              knowledge which was not the expected conclusion. However, as these results turned
              out insignificant when including control variables, we cannot draw any relevant
              conclusions about the relationship.                                 
               Moreover, it should also be mentioned that all these variables and the relationship
              between them could be reciprocal. In this part of the paper, we have analyzed
              homogeneity as an independent variable affecting participation in political discussions,
              political knowledge, and political interest. Nevertheless, it could also be that, for
              example, more political discussions lead to more political homogeneity. Going back to
              previous research on political homophily, it was suggested that individuals both seek to
              surround themselves with their similar others but also that individuals are affected by
              the people around them and adopt their behavior/thoughts. If so, more individual
              participation in political discussions would inevitably lead to more political
              homogeneity. The relationship between these two should then rather resemble a spiral
              where more of one lead to more of the other and so it continues.    
              Concluding remarks                                                  
              To summarize, the aim of this paper has been to investigate political homogeneity in
              light of previous research on political homophily. Homogeneity is suggested to be a
              direct result of homophily so even if not explicitly analyzing the occurrence of
              homophily as a phenomenon, the presence of homogeneity do say something about its
              applicability in the chosen case. The Swedish electorate constitute the case of analysis
              and the results thus speak to the relevance of political homophily in that setting. Since
              the Swedish electorate is somewhat more volatile in comparison to other electorates
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          16                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 19 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              that are often analyzed in relation to political homophily, it presents an interesting and
              important context for investigation.                                
               Two research questions have been the point of departure for this paper, namely: 1)
              among whom in Sweden is political homogeneity most common, and 2) what are the
              individual political consequences of being part of politically homogenous surroun-
              dings? Political homogeneity has been measured using a scale from zero to one, where
              one indicates full homogeneity. An initial overview of the measurement shows that
              homogeneity on average is more common within the Swedish electorate, however there
              is still a fairly even distribution of respondents along the measurement. For further
              insights one would have to look to table three showing the level of homogeneity across
              various groups of voters. Results from table three together with the regression analysis
              in the appendix, show that homogeneity is most common among ethnic majority
              voters, highly educated voters, ideologically extreme voters, conservative voters, and
              partisan voters. Out of these five indicators, own ideological position appear to be
              most indicative of homogeneity which would be expected seeing as the aim is to
              explain development of political homogeneity. From this it is only possible to confirm
              the third hypothesis highlighting political factors.                
               Furthermore, the regression analysis in the second part of the paper showed that
              political homogeneity positively affects both individual participation in political
              discussions and political interest. From previous research it was hypothesized that
              political homogeneity would positively affect political communication and interest as
              was also confirmed by the results, however the relationship between political
              homogeneity and knowledge did not go in line with the fifth hypothesis.
               All things considered, there are some important conclusions to be drawn from this
              relatively thorough investigation of political homogeneity in Sweden. First it is relevant
              to discuss the implications of this paper for the understanding of homophily.
              Mentioned earlier, political homogeneity could be considered as a direct effect of
              political homophily and the results from this paper are thus useful in broadening the
              understanding of the theory. In Sweden politically homogenous surroundings seem to
              be more common than politically heterogenous surroundings however there is also a
              significant amount of people who find themselves within heterogenous surroundings.
              Common for these people is to vote neither left nor right, as shown in table three.
              More so to the point, these results suggest that political homophily might not be as
              prevalent in Sweden as in other countries where the electorate is less volatile. When
              analyzing political homophily, or homophily in general, it is thus important to consider
              the context in which individuals live. Going back to the introduction, three types of
              homophily was mentioned, namely identity homophily, issue homophily and
              engagement homophily. Perhaps the result from this paper is an indication that identity
              homophily is not as widespread in Sweden as in other countries where homophily has
              been analyzed. Instead, considering the volatile character of the Swedish electorate,
              issue homophily might be of greater importance and could thus be a possible point of
              departure for future research.                                      
               Moreover, the implications have also been of methodological nature as a new
              measurement has been tested. As of now there are no other measurements using the
              same data which complicates a proper evaluation of the measurement. Given the
              limitations there is room for developments which would be a recommendation for
              future research. Additionally, it would also be interesting to analyze further the
              difference between family, friends, and neighbors in how each affect the individual and
              include more groups of people from individuals´ surroundings, for example co-
              workers.                                                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          17                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 20 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              References                                                          
              Boutyline, A., & Willer, R. (2017). The Social Structure of Political Echo Chambers:
              Variation in Ideological Homophily in Online Networks. Political Psychology, 38(3),
              551-569                                                             
              Chan, M. (2018). Reluctance to Talk About Politics in Face-to-Face and Facebook
              Settings: Examining the Impact of Fear of Isolation, Willingness to Self-Censor, and
              Peer Network Characteristics. Mass Communication & Society, 21(1), 1-23
                                                                                  
              Ertug, G., Brennecke, J., Kovács, B., & Zou, T. (2022). What does homophily do? A
              review of the consequences of homophily. The Academy of Management Annals,
              16(1), 38-69.                                                       
                                                                                  
              Ford, Robert and Will Jennings. (2020). “The Changing Cleavage Politics of Western
              Europe.” Annual Review of Political Science, 23:295-314             
                                                                                  
              Harteveld, Eelco. (2016) "Winning the ‘losers’ but losing the ‘winners’? The electoral
              consequences of the radical right moving to the economic left." Electoral Studies 44:
              225-234.                                                            
                                                                                  
              Horwitz, S. K., & Horwitz, I. B. (2007). The effects of team diversity on team
              outcomes: A meta-analytic review of team demography. Journal of management, 33(6),
              987-1015.                                                           
              Huber, G., & Malhotra, N. (2017). Political Homophily in Social Relationships. The
              Journal of Politics, 79(1), 269-283.                                
                                                                                  
              Inglehart, R., & Norris, P. (2017). Trump and the Populist Authoritarian Parties: The
              Silent Revolution in Reverse. Perspectives on Politics, 15(2), 443-454.
                                                                                  
              Kossinets, G., & Watts, D. (2009). Origins of homophily in an evolving social
              network. The American Journal of Sociology, 115(2), 405-450.        
                                                                                  
              Lazarsfeld, P., Gaudet, H., & Berelson, B. (1968). The people's choice: How the voter
              makes up his mind in a presidential campaign (3.rd ed.). New York: Columbia Univ.
              Press.                                                              
                                                                                  
              McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. (2001). Birds of a Feather: Homophily in
              Social Networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27(1), 415-444.        
                                                                                  
              Noelle‐Neumann, E. (1974). The spiral of silence a theory of public opinion. Journal of
              communication, 24(2), 43-51.                                        
              Oscarsson, Henrik (2020). Flytande väljare 2018. Valforskningsprogrammets
              rapportserie 2020:10. Göteborgs universitet: Statsvetenskapliga institutionen.
                                                                                  
              Oscarsson, H., Bergman, T., Bergström, A., & Hellström, J. (2021). Demokratirådets
              rapport 2021: polariseringen i Sverige. SNS förlag.                 
                                                                                  
              Renström, E., Bäck, H., & Schmeisser, Y. (2020). Vi ogillar olika. Om affektiv
              polarisering bland svenska väljare. In (pp. 427-443).               
                                                                                  
              Rogers, E. M., & Bhowmik, D. K. (1970). Homophily-heterophily: Relational concepts
              for communication research. Public opinion quarterly, 34(4), 523-53 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          18                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 21 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Appendix                                                            
                                                                                  
              Table 1  Ideological left-right placement of Swedish political parties according
                       to Swedish respondents (percent)                           
                                                                                  
                   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 Total               
                                                                                  
              V    58  24  11  2   1   3   0   0   0   0   0  100                 
              S    7   7   19  27  20  14  4   1   1   0   1  100                 
              C    3   2   5   8   15  35  17  8   3   1   1  100                 
              L    1   0   1   2   2   20  24  28  15  4   3  100                 
              M    0   0   0   0   0   4   3   9   26  29  27 100                 
              KD   1   0   1   1   1   7   6   12  22  26  23 100                 
              MP   15  15  18  17  13  15  2   1   0   0   0  100                 
              SD   1   0   0   1   1   9   4   7   11  16  49 100                 
                                                                                  
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The table presents an overview of how respondents place Swedish political parties on an ideological left-right scale. The scale ranges from 0 (=
              far left) to 10 (=far right). The data is collected using the survey question “In politics people sometimes refer to left and right. Where do you place the
              parties on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means far to left and 10 means far to the right?”. To remember from this table is that most respondents have a
              similar perception of how political parties should be distributed along the left-right scale. All results have been weighted against the official 2022 election
              result. All results are presented as percentages.                   
              Table 2  Recoded surrounding variables (percent)                    
                         -1      0       1      Total      n                      
                                                                                  
              Family     32      28     40      100      2 114                    
              Friends    26      35     39      100      2 095                    
              Neighbors  24      37     38      100      2 093                    
                                                                                  
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The data is collected using the survey question " When you think of people in your environment, approximately how many are on the left or
              right side of politics?”. Option 1 “far left” and option 2 “somewhat left” have been recoded to “-1”. Option 2 “as many at both sides” has been recoded
              to “0”. Option 4 “somewhat right” and option 5 “far right” has been recoded to “1”. All results are presented as percentages.
              Table 3  Own ideological placement in comparison to that of one’s family (cell
                       percent).                                                  
                                                                                  
                         Almost Somewhat    Somewhat Almost                       
                        everyone to more to the As many at more to the everyone to
                         the left left both sides right the right Total           
              Far left (0-1) 5   2     1      1     0      9                      
              Somewhat left (2-3) 5 7  3      1     1     17                      
              Neither (4-6) 2    5     18     7     4     35                      
              Somewhat right (7-8) 1 2 5      9     11    27                      
              Far right (9-10) 0 1     1      2     8     12                      
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The table illustrates the cell percentage for individual left-right position and the individual perception of family political identities. In the
              seventh column (showing the total) the total amount of respondent for each category of individual left-right position is displayed. Consequently, when
              adding the percentages for the seventh column we account for 100 percent of the sample. Data is collected using the survey question "When you think of
              people in your environment, approximately how many are on the left or right side of politics?” and using the survey question "In politics we sometimes talk
              about left and right. [...] on a scale between 0 and 10 where 0 is far left and 10 is far right […] where would you place yourself? 0 and 1 has been coded
              as “Far left”. 2 and 3 has been coded as “Somewhat left”. 4, 5 and 6 has been coded as “Neither”. 7 and 8 has been coded as “Somewhat right and
              finally 9 and 10 has been coded as “Far right”. From the cell percentages it is possible to deduce the similarity between individual left-right placement the
              identity of ones surrounding. For example, 11 percent of respondent who identify as somewhat right also find themselves within families where almost
              everyone identifies as right-wing voters. On the contrary, 0 percentage of far-left voters find themselves within families where almost everyone identifies as
              right-wing voters. All results are presented as percentages and all results have been weighted against the official 2022 election result.
                                          19                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 22 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 4  Own ideological placement in comparison to that of one’s friends (cell
                       percent).                                                  
                                                                                  
                         Almost Somewhat    Somewhat Almost                       
                        everyone to more to the As many at more to the everyone to
                         the left left both sides right the right Total           
              Far left (0-1) 4   3     2      0     0      9                      
              Somewhat left (2-3) 2 9  5      2     1      17                     
              Neither (4-6) 1    4     20     8     2      35                     
              Somewhat right (7-8) 0 2 7      13    6      27                     
              Far right (9-10) 0 0     2      4     6      12                     
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The table illustrates the cell percentage for individual left-right position and the individual perception of friends’ political identities. In the
              seventh column (showing the total) the total amount of respondent for each category of individual left-right position is displayed. Consequently, when
              adding the percentages for the seventh column we account for 100 percent of the sample. Data is collected using the survey question "When you think of
              people in your environment, approximately how many are on the left or right side of politics?” and using the survey question "In politics we sometimes talk
              about left and right. [...] on a scale between 0 and 10 where 0 is far left and 10 is far right […] where would you place yourself? 0 and 1 has been coded
              as “Far left”. 2 and 3 has been coded as “Somewhat left”. 4, 5 and 6 has been coded as “Neither”. 7 and 8 has been coded as “Somewhat right and
              finally 9 and 10 has been coded as “Far right”. From the cell percentages it is possible to deduce the similarity between individual left-right placement the
              identity of ones surrounding. For example, 11 percent of respondent who identify as somewhat right also find themselves within friend groups where
              almost everyone identifies as righ-wing voters. On the contrary, 0 percentage of far-left voters find themselves within friend groups where almost everyone
              identifies as right-wing voters. All results are presented as percentages and all results have been weighted against the official 2022 election result.
              Table 5  Own ideological placement in comparison to that of one’s neighbors (cell
                       percent).                                                  
                         Almost Somewhat    Somewhat Almost                       
                        everyone to more to the As many at more to the everyone to
                         the left left both sides right the right Total           
              Far left (0-1) 5   1     1      1      0     9                      
              Somewhat left (2-3) 0 11 3      3      1     17                     
              Neither (4-6) 0    2     27     5      1     35                     
              Somewhat right (7-8) 0 2 5      18     3     27                     
              Far right (9-10) 0 1     2      2      7     12                     
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The table illustrates the cell percentage for individual left-right position and the individual perception of neighbors’ political identities. In the
              seventh column (showing the total) the total amount of respondent for each category of individual left-right position is displayed. Consequently, when
              adding the percentages for the seventh column we account for 100 percent of the sample. Data is collected using the survey question "When you think of
              people in your environment, approximately how many are on the left or right side of politics?” and using the survey question "In politics we sometimes talk
              about left and right. [...] on a scale between 0 and 10 where 0 is far left and 10 is far right […] where would you place yourself? 0 and 1 has been coded
              as “Far left”. 2 and 3 has been coded as “Somewhat left”. 4, 5 and 6 has been coded as “Neither”. 7 and 8 has been coded as “Somewhat right and
              finally 9 and 10 has been coded as “Far right”. From the cell percentages it is possible to deduce the similarity between individual left-right placement the
              identity of ones surrounding. For example, 11 percent of respondent who identify as somewhat right also find themselves among neighbors where almost
              everyone identifies as right-wing voters. On the contrary, 0 percentage of far-left voters find themselves among neighbors where almost everyone identifies
              as right-wing voters. All results are presented as percentages and all results have been weighted against the official 2022 election result.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          20                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 23 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 6  Level of homogeneity based on respondents’ party choice (percent).
                                                                                  
                          0,00    0,33   0,66   1,00   Total      n               
                                                                                  
              V            11     32     25     32     100       119              
              S            27     25     20     24     100       483              
              C            21     36     26     17     100       105              
              L            15     24     33     28     100       75               
              M            11     20     27     42     100       325              
              KD           14     25     24     37     100       94               
              M P          1 9    2 9    2 4    2 8    100       90               
              SD           19     23     20     39     100       314              
                                                                                  
              Other        0      50     7      43     100       26               
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: The data is collected using the survey question “Which party did you vote for?”. All results are weighted against the official national election
              results in Sweden 2022. All result are presented as percentages.    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          21                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 24 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 7  Bivariate regression results illustrating the relationship between several
                       factors and level of political homogeneity.                
                      (1)  (2)   (3)  (4)   (5)  (6)   (7)  (8)   (9)             
                                                                                  
                     0,872                                                        
              Age    (0,005)                                                      
                                                                                  
              National    -0.064*                                                 
              background   (0,026)                                                
                                                                                  
              Gender            -0,022                                            
                                (0,017)                                           
              Urban-rural             0,004                                       
                                     (0,009)                                      
                                                                                  
              Educational                  0,039**                                
              background                   (0,125)                                
                                                                                  
              Class                             0,051***                          
                                                (0,012)                           
              Income                                  0,023**                     
                                                      (0,007)                     
                                                                                  
              Ideological                                  0,036***               
              placement                                    (0,008)                
              Partisanship                                      -0,055***         
                                                                 (0,147)          
                                                                                  
              Intercept 0,541*** 0,617*** 0,578*** 0,536*** 0,456*** 0,461*** 0,491*** 0,434*** 0,645***
                      (0,025) (0,030) (0,026) (0,026) (0,031) (0,024) (0,019) (0,024) (0,028)
                                                                                  
              Adjusted r2 -0,000 0,002 0,000 0,125 0,005 0,086 0,005 0,011 0,007  
                                                                                  
              Observations 2 084 2 084 2 084 1 812 1 875 1 826 2 079 2 084 2 030  
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
                                                                                  
              Comment: Table seven illustrates the bivariate regression results between nine different independent variables and the dependent variable political
              homogeneity. Age is measured as the age of the respondents from 18 and onwards. National background is a dummy variable where ethical minority is the
              category being tested and ethnical majority is the reference category. Gender is also a dummy variable where women is the category being tested and men
              is the reference category. The urban-rural variable has four categories: countryside, small town, larger city, Stockholm/Gothenburg/Malmö. Educational
              background has three categories: primary school, secondary school, and post-secondary school. Class also has three categories: lower class, middle class,
              and upper class. Income is measured using the disposable family income which has been recoded into five categories starting at 187 000kr. Ideological
              placement is based on respondents’ placements on the left-right scale ranging from 0 (=far left) to 10 (=far right), however the variable has been recoded
              into five categories. Finally, partisanship is a dummy variable where nonpartisanship is the category being tested and partisanship is the reference category.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          22                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 25 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:2                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 8  Multiple regression results illustrating the relationship between several
                       independent variables and level of political homogeneity.  
                                  Political homogeneity                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              National               -0.062*                                      
              background             (0,029)                                      
              Educational            0,037**                                      
              background             (0,139)                                      
                                                                                  
              Class                  0,026                                        
                                     (0,014)                                      
              Income                 0,005                                        
                                     (0,008)                                      
                                                                                  
              Ideological            0,037***                                     
              placement              (0,008)                                      
              Partisanship          -0,052***                                     
                                     (0,160)                                      
                                                                                  
              Intercept              0,456***                                     
                                     (0,061)                                      
                                                                                  
              Adjusted r2            0,029                                        
              Observations           1 640                                        
                                                                                  
              Source: Gothenburg University: Swedish National Election Study. Election study 2022
              Comment: Table eight illustrates the multiple regression results between six different independent variables and the dependent variable political
              homogeneity. National background is a dichotomous variable where one is equivalent to being part of the ethnic majority and two ethnic minority.
              Educational background has three categories: primary school, secondary school, and post-secondary school. Class also has three categories: lower class,
              middle class, and upper class. Income is measured using the disposable family income which has been recoded into five categories starting at 187 000kr.
              Ideological placement is based on respondents’ placements on the left-right scale ranging from 0 (=far left) to 10 (=far right), however the variable has
              been recoded into five categories. Finally, partisanship is a dichotomous variable where one is equivalent to partisanship and two no partisanship. The
              numbers in bold for each column show which variable was the main independent variable for that model. The rest are control variables.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          23                                      
                                                                                  

===== sida 26 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Swedish National Election Studies                                            
     Department of Political Science                                              
     University of Gothenburg                                                     
     Box 711, SE-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     The Swedish National Election Studies Program                                
     was established in 1954 by Jörgen Westerståhl                                
     and Bo Särlvik and is today a high profile network                           
     of researchers at the Department of Political                                
     Science in Gothenburg. The Program serve                                     
     as a collaborative platform for Swedish and                                  
     international scholars interested in studies of                              
     electoral democracy, representative democracy,                               
     opinion formation, and voting behavior.                                      
      The aim of our research is among others to                                  
     explain why people vote as they do and why an                                
     election ends in a particular way. We track and                              
     follow trends in the Swedish electoral democracy                             
     and make comparisons with other countries.                                   
     Professor Henrik Ekengren Oscarsson is the                                   
     director of the Swedish Election Studies Program.                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
