
===== sida 1 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Report                                                                       
                                                                                  
                                                         Swedish National Election Studies
                                                                                  
     2024:6                                              Department of Political Science
                                                         University of Gothenburg 
                                                         2024.12.17               
                                                                                  
                                                         www.valforskning.pol.gu.se
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     How  Voting Advice Applications Affect Turnout                               
     in European Parliamentary elections and                                      
                                                                                  
     national parliamentary elections                                             
                                                                                  
     Kajsa Evertsson                                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== sida 2 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Valforskningsprogrammets rapportserie                               
              Sedan 1950-talet genomför forskare knutna till Valforskningsprogrammet i Göteborg
              empiriska undersökningar av hur den svenska demokratin mår och utvecklas. Rapport-
              serien är vår viktigaste publikationskanal för att bidra till samhällets kunskapsförsörj-
              ning på demokratiområdet. Målsättningen är att sprida grundläggande fakta och forsk-
              ningsresultat som rör val och väljarbeteende till en bred publik av forskare, studenter,
              journalister, politiker och allmänhet.                              
                                                                                  
              The SNES Program Report Series                                      
              Since the 1950s, the researchers associated with the Swedish National Election Studies
              Program at the Department of Political Science, University of Gothenburg, conducts
              empirical research on the well-being and development of the Swedish democracy. The
              working report series is one of our main publication outlets. The aim is to publish basic
              facts and research results about elections and voting behavior to a broad audience of
              researchers, students, journalists, politicians and the public.     
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Quotation:                                                          
              Evertsson, Kajsa (2024). ‘How Voting Advice Applications Affect Turnout in European
              Parliamentary elections and national parliamentary elections’. Swedish National
              Election Studies Working paper series 2024:6. University of Gothenburg: Department of
              Political Science.                                                  
                                                                                  
              Redaktör för rapportserien:                                         
              Henrik Ekengren Oscarsson                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== sida 3 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              How   Voting  Advice   Applications   Affect                        
                                                                                  
              Turnout   in European    Parliamentary    elections                 
                                                                                  
              and  national  parliamentary    elections                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              KAJSA EVERTSSON                                                     
              Department of Political Science                                     
              University of Gothenburg                                            
              Sammanfattning                                                      
              Valkompasser har blivit ett vanligt inslag i de flesta valkampanjer i Europa. Forskning
              har visat att valkompasser kan påverka väljarna på flera olika sätt. Även om flera studier
              har funnit stöd för valkompassers positiva inverkan på valdeltagandet har de flesta en-
              bart studerat en typ av val åt gången och mestadels fokuserat på nationella parlaments-
              val. Dessutom verkar graden av påverkan variera. Med tanke på resultatens breda
              spännvidd och det övervägande fokuset på nationella parlamentsval är det viktigt att
              undersöka valkompassers inverkan på valdeltagandet vid olika typer av val, i samma
              övergripande valsystem. Till exempel vet vi att väljare i samma land tenderar att bete sig
              annorlunda i nationella parlamentsval jämfört med Europaparlamentsval, där nivån av
              intresse, kunskap och valdeltagande ofta är lägre. Därför undersöker denna studie
              huruvida valkompasser påverkade valdeltagandet i riksdagsvalet 2018 och Europa-
              parlamentsvalet 2019 i Sverige. Detta görs med hjälp av nationellt representativa och
              röstlängdsvaliderade registerdata från Valforskningsprogrammet. De övergripande re-
              sultaten visar att valkompasser påverkade valdeltagandet i båda valen, men mer så under
              Europaparlamentsvalet 2019.                                         
              Summary                                                             
              Voting Advice Applications (VAAs) have become a common feature of most election
              campaigns in Europe. Research has shown that VAAs can affect the electorate in nume-
              rous ways. Although several studies have found support for VAAs’ positive impact on
              turnout, most have only studied one type of election at a time and have mostly focused
              on national parliamentary elections. Moreover, the level of impact seems to vary. Con-
              sidering the wide range of the results and the predominant focus on national
              parliamentary elections, I argue that it is important to investigate the level of impact of
              VAAs on turnout at different types of elections, in the same overall electoral system. For
              example, we know that voters in the same country tend to behave differently in national
              parliamentary elections compared to European Parliament elections, where the level of
              interest, knowledge, and turnout is often lower. Hence, this study compares the impact
              of VAAs on turnout in the national parliamentary elections 2018 and the European
              Parliament elections 2019 in Sweden, using data from the Swedish National Election
              Studies and turnout validated against the official vote records. The overall findings show
              that VAAs did affect turnout in both elections, but more so during the European
              Parliament election 2019.                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== sida 4 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Introduction                                                        
              Numerous tools, measures, and campaign efforts can be used when trying to promote
              electoral participation in elections. One example is Voting Advice Applications (abbre-
              viated VAAs) that are “web-based tools designed to help voters to find a political party
              that matches their political views” (Fischer et.al. 2017:279). VAAs have become increa-
              singly popular in the last two decades, especially in Europe where VAAs were first intro-
              duced (Gemenis et.al. 2014:281).                                    
                VAAs produce easily accessible and understandable information regarding the most
              salient political issues and are said to lower the time and effort of getting politically
              involved. When the time and effort required to get politically informed is low; the
              likelihood of voting is higher. Henceforth, there are reasons to believe that VAAs have
              the potential to influence different electoral aspects such as turnout (Wall et.al.
              2014:418).                                                          
               Scholars have become increasingly interested in VAAs during the years but still after
              fifteen years of research, there is no consensus regarding the impact of VAAs on turnout
              (Gemenis 2024:2). As shown in a meta-analysis by Munzert and Ramirez-Ruiz
              (2021:699), most previous studies find that VAAs have a positive impact on turnout but
              for a few exceptions. However, concerns have been raised regarding the validity of the
              positive results in some studies. Scholars argue that the positive results might have been
              inflated due to methodological issues such as self-selection bias when using data from
              the VAA users (Munzert and Ramirez-Ruiz 2021:702).                  
                Most studies about VAAs in Europe investigate the impact and usage of VAAs in a
              national context and focus on national elections (e.g. Wall et.al. 2018; Kleinnijen-
              huiset.al. 2017; Benesch et.al 2023; Germann and Gemenis 2019; Liao et. al. 2020).
              Nonetheless, not many studies about VAAs have been made that investigate other types
              of elections such as European Parliament (EP) elections (Dinas 2014). Even fewer studies
              can be found that compare the usage and impact of VAAs between different kinds of
              elections.                                                          
                It is widely known in election research that voters behave differently depending on
              the electoral context. For example, EP elections are characterized by lower levels of
              interest and low turnout compared with national parliamentary elections (Reif &
              Schmitt 1980; Clark 2014). Lefevere and Aelst (2014:160), as well as Marquart et.al.
              (2020:2-4), argue that the mobilizing potential of campaign efforts often has a larger
              impact during EP elections compared to national parliamentary elections since voters
              have less knowledge and information from the outset. Hence, it is interesting to inves-
              tigate whether VAAs also have a larger influence on turnout in EP elections than in
              national parliamentary elections. In a rare study comparing VAAs in different elections,
              Van de Pol et.al. (2019) argue that the usage of VAAs differs between national parlia-
              mentary elections and EP elections, although they did not analyze the effect on turnout.
                This report thus aims to increase our knowledge on VAAs, by investigating if the
              influence of VAAs on electoral turnout differs between different types of elections. This
              paper focus on the national parliamentary election in Sweden 2018 and the EP election
              2019 in Sweden.                                                     
                Sweden is an interesting case for several reasons. First, the usage of VAAs in Sweden
              has increased massively during the years. In a survey made by the Swedish National
              Election Studies (SNES) in connection with the national parliamentary election 2022, 63
              per cent of the respondents reported that they had used a VAA. Also, more and more of
              the VAA users in Sweden express that they were influenced by VAAs when choosing
              which party to vote for (Oscarsson et. al 2024:271). Secondly, there are large differences
              in turnout to Swedish parliamentary elections compared to the EP elections. In the EP
              election 2019, the turnout rate was 32 percentage points lower than in the Swedish
              parliamentary election 2018; one of the largest differences in turnout in the EU
              (European Parliament 2019:34). The turnout gap was similar during the Swedish
              parliamentary election 2022 and the EP election 2024 (European Parliament 2024).
                                                                                  
                                         2                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 5 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Thirdly, the elections occurred close in time (Swedish parliamentary election in
              September 2018 and EP election in May 2019). Finally, SNES offer high-quality data for
              these analyses and use validated register data for turnout among the survey respondents.
              This will, in turn, counteract the methodological issues prevalent in some VAA studies
              using survey data.                                                  
               In 2020, I did a similar study (Evertsson 2020) but I was then not able to use data on
              turnout validated against the official vote records for both elections. Hence, this report
              will evaluate the previous study and present more precise and updated results. The aim
              is to compare the potential influence of VAAs in two different kinds of elections.
                                                                                  
              Voting Advice Applications (VAAs) and electoral behaviour           
              Since the introduction of VAAs in the Netherlands in 1989, VAAs have become increa-
              singly popular and are used by millions of voters. VAAs are an interactive online tool
              which present the best party match based on the VAA users’ answers to issue statements
              (Gemenis 2024:2). Most VAAs are produced and published by newspapers, often with
              assistance from scientists and knowledgeable persons in politics (Germann and Gemenis
              2019:151). During the years, VAAs have become more advanced and continues to be
              developed with for example usage of AI and chatbots in the VAAs (Kamoen, McCartan
              and Liebrecht 2022:161; Gemenis 2024:1).                            
                In Europe, VAAs are used by between 13-35 per cent of the electorate (Krouwel et.al.
              2012:4). The share is even higher at 40 per cent of the voters in the Netherlands where
              VAAs originate (van de Pol 2019:226) and the two largest VAAs in the Netherlands were
              consulted more than 10 million times before the Dutch Parliamentary Elections 2021
              (Kamoen, McCartan and Liebrecht 2022:161). VAAs are also employed in other parts
              of the world but usage is not as widespread (Wessel Tomborg and Albertsen 2023:583).
              How widely spread usage of VAAs is in a country may depend on how long VAAs have
              been prevalent in countries (Marschall 2014:97) and the party system. More fragmented
              multiparty systems make it harder for voters to decide which party to vote for and
              therefore, the proportion of VAA users may be larger (Kamoen, McCartan and Liebrecht
              2022: 160-161; Krouwel et.al. 2012:4; Wall et.al. 2014:418). VAA users tend to be
              younger, male, highly educated, and politically interested (Marshall 2014:98-101; SNES
              2024:270-1).                                                        
                Van de Pol et.al. (2014:403-4) divide VAA users into three different categories; (1)
              checkers who are users that are already interested in politics and know which party to
              vote for and uses VAAs for entertainment and to check whether VAAs produce their
              favorite party; (2) seekers who are using VAAs as a tool to decide which party to vote
              for and to get politically informed, as they are somewhat politically interested; and (3)
              doubters who are the least politically interested and do not have clear preferences
              regarding party choice.                                             
                Comparing first-order and second-order elections, Van de Pol et.al. (2019) found that
              checkers accounted for 58 per cent of the users in the Dutch parliamentary election 2012,
              whilst only 48 per cent in the EP election 2014. Contrastingly, the proportion of seekers
              was higher in the EP election (41 per cent) compared to 32 per cent in the national
              election. The proportion of doubters was about the same in both elections (10-11 per
              cent). Since the amount of seekers was higher in the second-order election, this also
              implies that these users actively use VAAs to learn and be active in the election campaign,
              which “suggests that VAAs’ mobilizing capacity is larger in second-order elections” (Van
              de Pohl 2018:235).                                                  
                It takes a lot of time and effort to get politically involved and Wessel Tromborg and
              Albertsen (2023:582) describes it as a Herculian task to have information about all elec-
              toral options. Rational choice theory is often used when evaluating the impact of VAAs
              and according to that theory, humans are rational and only interested in learning about
              things that interest them. In other words, if a voter is not interested in politics and elec-
              tions, the probability of voting is low. However, when the cost of getting politically
                                                                                  
                                         3                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 6 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              informed is low; the likelihood of voting is higher. Since VAAs decrease the time and
              effort of getting politically involved, VAAs “should lead to an increased likelihood of
              political participation” (Maheo 2017:515) and make voters more motivated when beco-
              ming more aware of the party differences (Gemenis et.al. 2014:282). 
                Nevertheless, scholars disagree about the electoral impact of VAAs. When it comes
              to the impact on turnout, results vary between scholars using different cases and metho-
              dologies. Munzert and Ramirez-Ruiz (2021:699-700) state in their meta-analysis of
              VAAs that the study design affects a lot when measuring the effects of VAAs. Obser-
              vational studies often find positive results whereas experiments do not (Enyedi
              2016:1013).                                                         
                Except for a few exceptions (for example Enyedi 2016:1010; Benesch et. al
              2023:692), most studies find evidence that VAAs affect turnout positively. Germann and
              Gemenis (2019:165) found that usage of one of the VAAs in Switzerland during the
              federal election 2007 were responsible for 1,2 percentage points of the total turnout.
              Gemenis et.al. (2014:282) found that VAA users were 4,2 times more likely to vote com-
              pared to non-users during the 2006 Dutch parliamentary election, and if no VAA would
              have been present, turnout would decrease with 4,4 per cent. This result is similar to the
              findings by other scholars such as Garzia et.al. (2014:106). Dinas et.al. (2014:297) found
              even higher numbers, that VAA users were 14 percentage points more likely to vote than
              non-VAA users during the EP election 2009. Furthermore, Garzia et.al. (2014:110)
              found that the effect of VAAs differed between different countries. While VAA users
              were 2 per cent more likely to vote in Germany, Finland and the Netherlands compared
              to non-VAA users, VAA users were 10 per cent more likely to vote in Switzerland. Most
              studies on the effect of VAAs on turnout have not compared the effect of VAAs on
              different types of elections.                                       
                The influence of VAAs may also vary between groups. Young voters with low educa-
              tion, low political interest, without any strong party identification, seem to be affected
              more by VAAs than other voters. These are also groups known to have a lower turnout
              than others do in elections (Gemenis et.al. 2014:286).              
              Elections and voting behaviour                                      
              Oscarsson and Holmberg (2016:49) make a difference between individual explanations,
              contextual explanations and institutional explanations when explaining electoral
              turnout. The most common focus in explaining electoral participation derives from
              individual explanations (Oscarsson and Holmberg 2016:50). This is partly because it is
              relatively easy and uncomplicated to study individual explanations (Verba et.al
              1995:270) and the strength in explaining electoral turnout through individual explana-
              tions has been proven in numerous studies. One common category of explanations con-
              cerns resources such as education, age, occupation, class and income, as well as the level
              of social integration such as position on the labor market, citizenship, country of origin,
              the size of one person’s network and marital status. Studies have shown that people with
              higher education, higher income and more advanced jobs vote to a higher degree than
              people with no or low education, low income and people with less advanced or no jobs.
              Older people, married and people with large social networks also tend to vote more
              frequently than younger persons, people living alone and people with small networks
              (Oscarsson and Holmberg 2016:52).                                   
                Another group of individual explanations focus on motivations, i.e. what psycholo-
              gically influences people to vote. Politically interested persons and strong party identi-
              fiers tend to vote more frequently than others do. People with extremist party preferences
              have a higher tendency to vote compared with people that vote for centrist parties
              (ibid.:53-5). Another motivation can be a feeling of civic duty, or that it is exciting to be
              part of politics and enjoy the company of other politically active citizens (Verba et.al.
              1995:109-110).                                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         4                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 7 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                Contextual explanations also matter. The social context explains how family, the
              neighborhood and the workplace can influence a person’s voting behaviour. Turnout is
              generally higher in surroundings that have a high tendency to vote and vice versa. In
              addition, the digital context can matter. Haenschen (2016:556) found that Facebook
              posts, urging voters to vote, led to more people voting during the 2014 general election
              in Texas, USA.                                                      
                Moreover, turnout is higher in elections that are perceived as exciting and important.
              The political context differs between elections and people are more motivated to vote if
              the election shows large differences between the parties and high ideological polarization
              (Oscarsson and Holmberg 2016:58-60). When there is a lot at stake during an election
              such as a potential change of government, the media put in more effort into the election
              and parties make a larger effort to mobilize voters. This is a central aspect of the second-
              order election theory (Reif & Schmitt 1980), where higher turnout in national parlia-
              mentary elections is expected, as they are seen as more important and exciting than for
              example local elections or the EP elections.                        
                How and when the election is structured are institutional explanations that have
              implications for an election’s outcome. For example, voters are more willing to vote if
              the election is held during late spring or early autumn and on weekends (Oscarsson &
              Holmberg 2016:61). Countries also have different minimum age of voting, voters might
              be obliged to register before voting or have compulsory voting. Oscarsson and Holmberg
              (2016:62) argue that there is an interplay between individual’s motivation and the
              institutional setting, indicating that if the thresholds for voting are low, more people tend
              to vote.                                                            
              Different elections; different voting behaviour                     
              Turnout is lower in EP elections compared to the national elections in the EU Member
              States (Viola 2015:3) and the turnout gap is particularly large in some countries such as
              Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Sweden (European Parliament 2024:40). Scholars have
              developed different explanations for this difference in voting behaviour and two evident
              strands exist, namely the second-order election theory and alternative explanations
              (Hobolt & de Vries 2016).                                           
                Reif and Schmitt (1980) made a distinction between first-order elections, such as
              elections to the national parliament, and second-order elections, such as elections to the
              EP and local elections. The main element in this theory is that the voting behaviour
              differs between first- and second-order elections because voters, parties and the media
              simply do not perceive second-order elections as interesting nor as important as first-
              order elections. Lower turnout in EP elections can thus be attributed to the fact that
              voters perceive that it is “less at stake” in second-order elections as the elections do not
              lead to government formation. Furthermore, the EP has been considered by some actors
              as a weak institution in EU politics; meaning that some voters do not perceive it
              worthwhile to vote (Marsh & Mikhaylov 2010:8). Viola (2015:41) also argues that a
              mobilization deficit exists during EP elections since neither parties nor the media spend
              lots of attention on EP elections and campaigns. Lefevere and Aelst (2014:161) argue
              that the political parties and media “are not expected to invest in second-order
              campaigns because the benefits of higher turnout are smaller and obtaining more votes
              does not yield equal returns” (ibid).                               
                Moreover, voters are not expected to consider issues connected to the EU when voting
              in the EP elections, but rather vote on national, domestic issues according to the second-
              order elections theory. Clark and Rohrschneider (2009:646) refer to this as the transfer
              hypothesis. Another reason might also be that some voters have low knowledge about
              the EU or feel that the EU is too distant. EP elections are thus expected to function as
              mid-term polls rather than separate elections (Hobolt & de Vries 2009:424) and voters
              might use the EP elections to show dissatisfaction with the work of the government. This
              is also the theoretical explanation as to why larger and government parties are expected
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         5                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 8 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              to perform worse in EP elections compared to national elections (Marsh & Mikhaylov
              2010:12). The timing of EP elections in relation to national parliamentary elections’
              electoral cycles is also expected to matter. The support for government parties is expected
              to be higher closer to national elections (Schmitt & Teperglou 2015:296-297).
                Even though expectations from the second-order election theory have proven to be
              accurate in several studies, other explanations to differences in voting behaviour in
              national and EP elections have been lifted (Hobolt & Wittrock 2011:31). A lot has
              changed since Reif and Schmitt (1980) wrote their study about EP elections as second-
              order elections in the 1980s. Since then, European integration has both widened and
              deepened with more policy areas managed by the EU and people are more and more
              affected by the EU in their everyday lives (Clark & Rohrschneider 2009:646-7). Alter-
              native explanations have in common their belief that, at least some voters, do care about
              the EP elections and base their voting intentions not only on national concerns but con-
              sider EU issues (Carubba & Timpone 2005; Clark & Rohrschneider 2009; Hobolt 2015;
              Hong 2015; Marsh & Mikhaylov 2010; Treib 2005).                     
                Proponents of alternative explanations argue that the amount of consideration about
              EU issues voters have when voting in EP elections is dependent on individual-level factors
              and aspects in the campaign structure. Hobolt and Wittrock (2011:39) state that many
              voters initially based their vote on national issues, as highlighted in the second-order
              election theory, but that as voters become more informed about the EU and EP elections,
              voters tend to consider EU issues more. Hobolt and Spoon (2012:701) further argue that
              the level of politicization in the domestic debate about the EU affects whether voters
              consider domestic and/or EU matters and decide to vote or not. Furthermore, Clark
              (2014:342-3) state that the decision to abstain to vote EP elections is not because of a
              lack of interest in EU matters but is rather dependent on the voter’s doubts about
              whether the EP can influence EU decision-making and if the EP represents the views and
              opinions held by the citizens.                                      
              Hypotheses                                                          
              The first hypothesis deal with the influence that VAAs can have on voting in general.
              Since the expectation is that VAAs can reduce the cost of getting politically involved
              (Maheo 2017:515), and since finding a party that matches their viewpoint might lead
              voters to feel more motivated to vote (Gemenis et.al. 2014:282), VAAs should have the
              potential to increase the likelihood of political participation. Hence, the expectations are
              that:                                                               
                         : The probability of voting in the Swedish parliamentary election 2018
                       increases if a voter uses VAAs                             
                       𝐻𝐻 1𝑎𝑎                                                     
                         : The probability of voting in the European Parliament election 2019
                       increases if a voter uses VAAs                             
                       𝐻𝐻1𝑏𝑏                                                      
              Voters behave differently in national parliamentary elections and EP elections; especially
              turnout tends to be lower in the latter. The threshold for getting politically involved in
              EP elections is higher. However, if the time and effort for getting politically involved are
              reduced by using VAAs, they in turn may have an even larger mobilizing power in these
              types of elections than in first-order elections. Lefevere and Aelst (2014:160) argue that
              the mobilizing effects of measures to promote higher turnout should be higher during
              second-order elections compared to first-order campaigns because “these campaign
              effects occur in an information-sparse context” (ibid.)             
                Van de Pol et.al. (2019:241) also claims that people use VAAs for different purposes
              in first- and second-order elections. Since more users use VAAs for the specific purpose
              of getting better politically informed and choose which party to vote for during second-
              order elections, this “suggests that VAAs’ mobilizing capacity is larger in second-order
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         6                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 9 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              elections” (Van de Pohl 2018:235). Consequently, it is reasonable to formulate the
              second hypothesis as followed:                                      
                                                                                  
                        : The probability of voting in both the Swedish parliamentary election
                       2018 and the European Parliament election 2019 increases if a voter uses
                       𝐻𝐻a 2 VAA, but the difference concerning electoral turnout between VAA
                       users and non-VAA users is larger in the European Parliament election
                       2019 than in the Swedish parliamentary election 2018.      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Data and variables                                                  
              The data comes from the Swedish National Election Studies Programme (SNES): the
              Swedish parliamentary election study 2018, and the European Parliament election study
              2019. A description of the material can be found in Appendix A.     
                One unique aspect of SNES data is that in addition to the data from the surveys, the
              data sets from SNES also include register data. No other election survey in the world
              includes this type of material. The register data comes from Statistics Sweden (SCB) that
              holds information about Swedish citizens such as income, electoral turnout, marital
              status, country of birth, job, etc. The usage of register data ensures the correctness of the
              data material and enables researchers to bypass misinformation provided by respon-
              dents.                                                              
              There are negative aspects to using different surveys, since the respondents, the number
              of respondents, the questions and the timing is different, meaning that results derived
              from the surveys cannot be directly compared. However, this paper aims to investigate
              larger trends rather than individual aspects and not precise measures.
                The dependent variable is captured by using the question “Did you vote in the
              parliamentary elections this year?” for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the
              question “Did you vote in this year's European Parliament election?” for the EP election
              2019. Both these questions have been corrected by using register data, as there is a high
              tendency of respondents responding to the question wrongfully, either intentionally or
              unintentionally (Holbrook and Krosnick 2010:328). By controlling the data with register
              data, we bypass this problem. Among the respondents in the Swedish parliamentary
              election 2018, 97,54 per cent voted (SNES 2018), compared to the turnout of 87,2 per
              cent (Valmyndigheten 2020a). In the EP election 2019, 79,65 per cent of the respondents
              voted (SNES 2019), compared to the turnout of 55,3 per cent (Valmyndigheten 2020b).
              It is known that politically interested persons with a generally higher likelihood of voting
              are also the persons that have a higher tendency to answer surveys, hence the higher
              likelihood of overrepresentation (Voogt & Saris 2003:165).          
                The key independent variable is captured by using the question “Ahead of this year's
              election, did you do any of the party tests/Voting Advice Applications that different
              media had on their websites, where you could test which party you thought was closest?”
              for the Swedish parliamentary election 2019 and the question “Ahead of this year’s
              election to the European Parliament, did you: Do a party test/Voting Advice Application
              that different media had on their websites?” for the EP election 2019. Even though both
              questions in the two surveys ask for the same thing, the wording of the questions is
              slightly different. This aspect is important to take into consideration due to response bias
              since people may answer questions differently depending on how the question is worded
              (Weaver et.al 1997:24). It is also important to acknowledge the issue of order effect bias
              (Ahmad et.al 2014:206) since the questions were situated differently in each survey.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         7                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 10 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Figure 1 Distribution of the key independent variables, nominal scale
                                                                                  
               100                                                                
                                                                                  
               80                                                                 
                                                                                  
               60                                           52,7                  
                                                       45,1                       
                                      36,9                                        
               40                          30,0                                   
                      18,0 17,2                                                   
               20                                                                 
                0                                                                 
                     Yes, did several tests Yes, did occasional tests No, did not do any test
                         Swedish parliamentary election 2018 European Parliament election 2019
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019
                                                                                  
              In the analyses, the response options “Yes, did several tests” and “Yes, did occasional
              tests” have been merged into one category since this paper aims to differ between VAA
              users and non-VAA users, and not differentiate between different types of VAA users as
              well.                                                               
                The control variables have been categorized into groups of explanations: Individual
              resources, Individual motivations and Contextual explanations. The control variables
              are not only of interest for electoral turnout but also usage of VAAs. For example, Van
              de Pol (2019:228) argues that age, gender, education, political interest, and party
              affiliation affect whether someone turns to a VAA or not.           
                The individual resource variables are Gender, Age, Education, Income, Marital status
              and Place of residence. Albeit gender differences have decreased over time, it is important
              to control for Gender since women have proven to be more likely than men to vote in
              EP elections in the past (Berg & Oscarsson 2015). Previous studies have also shown that
              age affects electoral turnout. The probability of voting is lower among young people but
              increases with age until persons get older and the probability of voting decreases again.
              This means that Age and Electoral turnout often show a curvilinear relationship and
              therefore, Age squared is also included (Bhatti et.al. 2012). Education and Income are
              included in the analysis persons with high education and high income are more likely to
              vote compared to people with lower education and income. When it comes to Marital
              status, people that live together with someone have a higher tendency to vote than people
              living alone (Oscarsson & Holmberg 2016:51-2), and Place of residence since people
              living in cities are more likely to vote in the EP elections compared to people living in
              rural areas (Oscarsson & Holmberg 2010:47).                         
                The motivational control variables are Political interest and Political affiliation since
              turnout is higher among persons interested in politics and those who identify with a
              party. Ideology matters as extreme positions increase turnout. Member in trade
              union/professional organisation is included since members in trade union/professional
              organizations have higher tendencies to vote. Regarding contextual explanations, the
              variables regarding how the elections are perceived are important. Political effect, Clear
              party differences and Opinion about the election campaign are included since if the
              election is perceived as exciting and interesting, if there are clear party differences and if
              the election campaign is not perceived as focusing too much on party bickering, the
              likelihood of voting is higher. If a voter is convinced to vote by someone in their
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         8                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 11 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              surroundings, this may also increase the likelihood of voting. An overview of all variables
              can be found in Appendix B.                                         
                Since the dependent variable Electoral turnout is dichotomous and measures whether
              a person voted or abstained in the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the EP
              election 2019, logistic regression modelling is used. For easier interpretation of the
              results in the logistic regression, not only the b-coefficients are presented but the
              predicted probabilities are calculated as well. The predicted probabilities compare
              different values of the independent variable with each other, and how these values relate
              to the dependent variable, while holding the remaining independent variables at their
              mean values. The predicted probabilities range between 0 and 1 and can be interpreted
              as percentage points (Williams 2012:308-312).                       
                When considering alternative methods, the research question could also have been
              answered through a qualitative method by doing for example interviews that potentially
              would have deepened the understanding of the phenomena of interest. Nevertheless, the
              generalizability of the results might have been negatively affected by doing interviews
              due to a smaller sample. Also, since this paper investigates two elections that happened
              years ago, there is a possibility of memory failure if one would make interviews regarding
              electoral behaviour in 2018 and 2019.                               
                The most expedient choice of method would be to make an experiment. Nonetheless,
              experiments are eminently time-consuming and require more time and resources than
              this paper can afford. Since this paper investigates two types of elections held at different
              points in time that were not occurring during the writing of this paper, the time aspect
              also makes it impossible to accomplish an experiment. Gemenis et.al. (2014:283) also
              highlights that some ethical aspects need to be considered before making an experiment
              regarding VAAs. Persons in the control group that are not using VAAs might be dis-
              advantaged in their electoral behaviour compared to persons using VAAs and it is
              difficult to ensure compliance with not using VAAs in the control group.
              Results                                                             
              This paper investigates whether the probability of voting in the Swedish parliamentary
              election 2018 and the European Parliament election 2019 increases if a voter uses VAAs,
              and whether the impact of VAAs differs between the elections. First, the two elections
              are analyzed separately with four different models, in Appendix C for the Swedish
              parliamentary election 2018 and Appendix D for the EP election 2019. Secondly, the
              results of the two elections have been merged in Table 5.           
                In Appendix C and Appendix D, Model 1 includes control variables inherent in
              individual explanations – resource explanations for electoral turnout, while in Model 2,
              variables inherent in individual explanations – motivational explanations are included.
              Control variables inherent in contextual explanations for electoral turnout are added in
              Model 3. The full model with all the control variables inherent in both individual and
              contextual explanations are presented in Model 4.                   
                When analyzing the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 in Appendix C, it becomes
              evident that usage of VAAs and electoral turnout have a positive and statistically
              significant relationship in all four models. The predicted probability in the full model
              tells us that VAA users have 1 percentage point higher probability of voting compared
              to non-VAA users (98,6 per cent among non-VAA users and 99,6 per cent among VAA
              users).                                                             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         9                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 12 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Figure 2 Average Predicted Probability of voting in the Swedish parliamentary
                       election 2018 among VAA users and non-VAA users            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019
              Among the control variables for in individual explanations – resource explanations, the
              statistical significance for Age increased in Model 4 compared with Model 1. Age
              squared and Marital status are stable at the same level of statistical significance in Model
              1 and Model 4. The reasoning for including a squared variable for age is because
              previous research (e.g. Bhatti et.al. 2012) has found that the relationship between age
              and electoral turnout often shows a curvilinear relationship, i.e. younger persons have a
              lower likelihood of voting compared to middle-aged persons, but that the likelihood of
              voting again decreases when a person gets older. However, as shown in Appendix E,
              turnout increased the older a person gets among the survey respondents, albeit showing
              small differences.                                                  
                When it comes to the control variables inherent in individual explanations –
              motivational explanations, only Political affiliation shows a statistically significant
              relationship in both Model 2 and Model 4. None of the variables inherent in contextual
              explanations are statistically significant in either Model 3 or Model 4. Most of the
              predicted probabilities for the variables with statistical significance in Model 4 do not
              show large deviation but have decreased with up to 0,6 percentage points compared to
              the previous models.                                                
                In Appendix D where the EP election 2019 is analyzed, the relationship between
              usage of VAAs and electoral turnout is positive and statistically significant at the highest
              level in all four models. VAA users have 13 percentage points higher probability of voting
              in the election compared to non-VAA users, as shown in the full model (81,4 per cent
              among non-VAA users and 94,2 per cent among VAA users).             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        10                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 13 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Figure 3 Average Predicted Probability of voting in the European Parliament
                       election 2019 among VAA users and non-VAA users            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019
                                                                                  
              Among the individual explanations - resource explanations, the only statistically
              significant variables in Model 1 are High education and Large city. However, High
              education is no longer statistically significant in the full model. Large city is still
              statistically significant, but at a lower level, in the full model. When it comes to individual
              explanations – motivational explanations, the variable Political interest is statistically
              significant at the highest level in both Model 2 and Model 4. Ideology is also statistically
              significant, at the lowest level in Model 2 but a higher level in Model 4. All of the
              variables inherent in contextual explanations are statistically significant at the highest
              level in Model 3 and Model 4 except Opinion about the election campaign that is not
              statistically significant in any of the models.                     
                Most of the predicted probabilities among the control variables with statistical signi-
              ficance in the full model show similar values compared to the previous models with dif-
              ferences of 0,2 percentage points. However, the predicted probability for Political inte-
              rest has lowered from 11 percentage points in Model 2 to 6 percentage points in the full
              model, and Convinced has lowered from 13 percentage points in Model 3 to 0,9
              percentage points in the full model.                                
                Now when the results for the two elections have been presented separately, we are
              able to compare the results between the two elections.1 We have been able to confirm
              both hypothesis and since VAA users showed a higher probability of voting in
              both the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the EP election 2019, but the question
              now is whether w𝐻𝐻e 1𝑎𝑎 can co𝐻𝐻n 1 f 𝑏𝑏 irm hypothesis . Table 5 shows the full models for both
              elections.                                                          
                                         𝐻𝐻2                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              1 Since the results derived from different surveys with different respondents, wording of questions and potential
              order effect bias, it is important to be slightly careful when directly comparing the results between the elections.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        11                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 14 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Table 5  Logistic regression of effects on the dependent variable Electoral turnout
                       during the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the European
                       Parliament election 2019                                   
                                    Swedish parliamentary European Parliament     
                                       election 2018    election 2019             
                                  Coef (S.E) PP     Coef (S.E) PP                 
              VAA usage (ref=Not used a VAA)                                      
              Used a VAA          1,32** (0,58) 0∆,01 1,30*** (0,23) ∆0,13        
              Gender (ref=female)                                                 
              Male                0,59 (0,52) 0,003 0,08 (0,23) 0,007             
              Age                 -0,28** (0,14) 0,00008 0,01 (0,06) 0,003        
              Age squared         0,003** (0,006)   0,0003 (0,0006)               
              Education (ref= Low education)                                      
              Medium education    1,06 (0,98) 0,004 0,27 (0,46) 0,03              
              High education      1,07 (1,03) 0,004 0,76 (0,47) 0,08              
              Income (ref=Low income)                                             
              Medium income       0,18 (0,67) -0,004 -0,02 (0,31) -0,007          
              High income         1,16 (0,73) 0,002 0,48 (0,30) 0,04              
              Marital status                                                      
              (ref=Single/Widow/Widower)                                          
              Cohabitant/Married/Partnership 1,30*** (0,51) 0,010 0,13 (0,25) 0,01
              Place of residence (ref=Rural area)                                 
              Small town/village  -0,77 (0,76) -0,009 0,10 (0,35) 0,009           
              Big town/City       0,31 (0,76) 0,003 -0,002 (0,31) -0,0003         
              Large city          1,45 (1,22) 0,007 -0,75* (0,40) 0,06            
              Member in trade union/professional                                  
              organization (ref=Not member)                                       
              Member              0,04 (0,54) -0,0008 0,20 (0,23) 0,02            
              Political interest (ref=Not interested)                             
              Interested          0,006 (0,54) 0,0002 0,65*** (0,23) 0,06         
              Party supporter (ref=Not party                                      
              supporter)                                                          
              Party supporter     2,65** (1,09) 0,011 0,06 (0,24) 0,005           
              LR - Ideology (0-10) 0,09 (0,11) 0,0006 -0,09** (0,04) -0,008       
              Campaign interesting (ref=Not                                       
              interesting/exciting campaign)                                      
              Indeed interesting/exciting campaign -0,27 (0,53) -0,0014 0,62** (0,28) 0,05
              Clear party differences (ref=No clear                               
              party differences)                                                  
              Indeed clear party differences -0,26 (0,52) -0,0014 0,65*** (0,23) 0,06
              Opinion about the election                                          
              campaign (ref=Too much party                                        
              bickering)                                                          
              Not too much party bickering 0,03 (0,68) 0,001 -0,06 (0,25) -0,005  
              Convinced to vote (ref=Not convinced)                               
              Convinced           -0,25 (0,55) -0,006 -0,82*** (0,24) -0,09       
              Constant            5,76* (3,17)      -1,25 (1,35)                  
              Pseudo              0,2118            0,1774                        
              N    𝟐𝟐             1,125             884                           
                  𝑹𝑹                                                              
              Note: Dependent variable Electoral turnout (1=voted, 0=not voted). Entries are coefficients, standard errors and predicted probabilities ( PP) from
              logistic regression computed using Stata. Standard errors in brackets. Number of observations hold constant due to missing values. ***, ** and *
              denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 per cent, respectively.2 3 4 ∆
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019.
              2 Diagnostic tests showed no signs of multicollinearity between the variables and the Goodness-of-fit test showed
              that the model fits reasonably well.                                
              3 OLS regression of the full models for both elections were performed as a robustness check and showed no
              substantial disparities between the main relationship of interest, namely Usage if VAAs and Electoral turnout.
              4 As a second robustness check, I ran both of the full models for both elections with the variable Usage of VAAs
              excluded. The relationship between the dependent variable and the control variables did not change considerably.
                                        12                                        

===== sida 15 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              As shown in Table 5, when comparing the predicted probability of voting in the elections
              among non-VAA users and VAA users, the difference in the Swedish parliamentary
              election 2018 was 1 percentage point, whereas, in the EP election 2019, the difference
              was 13 percentage points. This means that we can confirm hypothesis .
                                                          𝐻𝐻2                     
              Analysis                                                            
              The importance of studying voting behavior in different electoral contexts can be attri-
              buted to the fact that voters behave differently depending on the election. Much focus
              has been on how voters behave during national parliamentary elections vis-à-vis EP
              elections and this paper contributes to this field. The EP elections have suffered from low
              turnout rates compared to national elections for decades and several attempts have been
              implemented to increase turnout (Hobolt & Spoon 2012).              
                This paper hypothesized that the probability of voting in the Swedish parliamentary
              election 2018 and the EP election 2019 increases if a voter uses VAAs ( and ).
              There are logical reasons for believing that VAAs have the potential to affect electoral
              outcomes. VAAs produce easily understandable information regarding the𝐻𝐻 1 m 𝑎𝑎 ost im𝐻𝐻p 1 o 𝑏𝑏 r-
              tant political issues and what stance the political parties have concerning these issues
              without much time and effort required from the users. In line with rational choice theory,
              people are only interested to put in time and effort into things that interest them. The
              probability of voting is dependent on how interested voters are in getting politically
              informed. According to Garzia et.al. (2014:105), voters are expected to take advantage
              of measures aimed at cutting the time and effort of getting politically involved. This is
              exactly what VAAs aim to do, i.e., to decrease the threshold of getting politically
              informed and involved during elections. If voters use VAAs, they may get more motivated
              to vote since they become better informed and realize that some parties represent similar
              political views as the voter.                                       
                The results found support for these assumptions. This paper found that VAA users
              had a higher probability of voting in the respective elections compared with non-VAA
              users. Consequently, the results confirmed the results from several studies (for example
              Germann and Geminis 2019; Gemenis et.al. 2014; Garzia et.al. 2014; Dinas 2014) and
              found support was found for both and . In the results of both elections, the
              relationship between the independent variable Usage of VAAs and the dependent
              variable Electoral turnout was statist𝐻𝐻ic 1 a 𝑎𝑎 lly sign𝐻𝐻i 1 fi 𝑏𝑏 cant and positive.
                The next dimension of this paper is to investigate whether the impact that VAAs serve
              on electoral turnout differs depending on the electoral contexts. Proponents of the
              second-order election theory and alternative explanations have found that the level of
              interest and turnout is often lower in second-order elections such as EP elections. Both
              theoretical strands posit disparate causes for this, but Lefevere and Aelst (2014:160)
              argue that the mobilizing effects of campaign efforts to promote higher turnout are
              higher during second-order elections compared to first-order elections because “these
              campaign effects occur in an information-sparse context” (ibid.). Consequently, voters
              may also be affected by VAAs differently depending on the election. Van de Pol et.al.
              (2019) have shown that people use VAAs for different purposes in first- and second-
              order elections. In both first- and second-order elections, most users use VAAs for
              entertainment purposes (so-called checkers). However, more users also use VAAs to get
              better informed and choose which party to vote for in second-order elections compared
              with first-order elections (so-called seekers). Since the share of seekers is higher in
              second-order elections, it is reasonable to believe that voters get more affected by VAAs
              in second-order elections. That the share of seekers is higher during second-order elec-
              tions also “suggests that VAAs’ mobilizing capacity is larger in second-order elections”
              (Van de Pohl 2018:235).                                             
                Therefore, the third hypothesis ( suggested that the probability of voting increases
              if voters use VAAs in the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the EP election 2019,
              but that the difference concerning 𝐻𝐻e 2 le)ctoral turnout among VAA users and non-VAA
                                                                                  
                                        13                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 16 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              users was larger during the EP election 2019 than in the Swedish parliamentary election
              2018. The results of this paper showed that the difference in electoral turnout among
              VAA users and non-VAA users was 1 percentage point during the Swedish parliamentary
              election 2018, whereas in the EP election 2019, the difference was 13 percentage points.
              Since the difference in percentage points is larger in the EP election than in the Swedish
              parliamentary election, a larger difference can be found among VAA users and non-VAA
              users in the EP election 2019. This implicates that we got support for .
                The results are in line with previous research by Lefevere and Aelst (2014:160) and
              Marquart (2020:2-4), namely that the mobilizing capacity of campaign𝐻𝐻 e 2 fforts to increa-
              se turnout have a larger impact in second-order elections. The results also confirmed the
              suggestion by Van de Pohl (2018:235) that VAAs’ potential to mobilize voters might be
              larger during second-order elections.                               
                Proponents of the second-order election theory argue that the interest in EP elections
              is low because people simply do not care about the outcome and consequently, turnout
              rates are lower in EP elections. However, proponents of alternative explanations instead
              argue that people are increasingly considering the EP elections and EU politics. We know
              that the share of the electorate that uses VAAs was higher during the Swedish parliamen-
              tary election 2018 (55 per cent) compared to the EP election (49 per cent), but the size
              of the shares is not very different and only differ 6 percentage points. This may implicate
              that the interest of getting politically informed about EP elections and EU politics is
              increasing and that alternative explanations better theoretically explain the findings in
              this paper.                                                         
                Concerning the findings in how the control variables relate to Electoral turnout, seve-
              ral differences can be distinguished. During the Swedish parliamentary election 2018,
              the variables with statistical significance all belonged to variables inherent in individual
              explanations for electoral. Concerning the EP election 2019, variables with statistical
              significance belonged to both individual explanations and contextual explanations for
              electoral turnout.                                                  
                That contextual explanations have a better predictive power in the EP elections might
              be explained by the second-order nature of EP elections and that people are not as know-
              ledgeable and interested in EP elections. In Swedish parliamentary elections, voting may
              be more imprinted in the electorate and many voters may perceive voting as a civic duty.
              Also, voters may be more loyal towards their favorite party in the Swedish parliamentary
              elections as Political affiliation was statistically significant during the Swedish parlia-
              mentary election 2018 but not in in the EP election 2019. In the EP elections, on the
              other hand, these feelings and perceptions may not be as strong since these elections have
              not been present in Swedish politics for as long time and EP elections do not lead to
              government formation. Instead, the support for contextual explanations in the EP
              election 2019 demonstrates that voters are more influenced by their surroundings.
                Nevertheless, it is also important to acknowledge the shortcomings of the results
              found in this paper. These results may not be representative of the whole Swedish
              population since a certain type of voters responds to surveys more than others. Voogt &
              Saris (2003:165) have shown that politically interested persons with a generally higher
              likelihood of voting also tend to respond to surveys to a higher degree compared to
              politically uninterested persons. This effect is evident given that almost all of the
              respondents (97,5 per cent) voted in the election even after controlling the data and using
              turnout validated against the official vote records. Also, since the respondents got
              information about the survey before the elections, this may motivate voters to vote since
              the voters got an eye-opener about the elections. It is also indisputable that the results
              may be affected by social desirability bias as the respondents may portrait themselves as
              more politically interested and involved than they are.             
                Also, since the material used in this paper derives from two different surveys, each
              with different respondents, design, questionnaire and timing, the results in the two
              respective elections cannot be directly compared. For a more cautious interpretation of
                                                                                  
                                        14                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 17 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              the results, the results should therefore instead of precise measurements be understood
              as that usage of VAAs does impact electoral turnout in both first- and second-order
              elections, and that the impact of VAAs on electoral turnout is larger in second-order
              elections.                                                          
                One final aspect to consider is the causal effect of usage of VAAs for voting or
              abstaining in elections. This paper hypothesizes that by using VAAs, voters get more
              probable of voting. However, the relationship may function in the opposite direction.
              Potentially, voters who already intend to vote may also be more likely to use VAAs. We
              know from previous research (Van de Pol et.al. 2019) that the largest share of users uses
              VAAs for entertainment purposes. However, we also know that many voters use VAAs
              as a tool to get politically informed and to decide about party choice; meaning that there
              are also strong reasons for believing that VAAs causally lead to more voters voting.
              Previous research and theoretical frameworks provide several arguments that VAAs can
              affect turnout positively such as arguments by the rational choice theory, and that people
              are more inclined to vote if the time and effort of getting politically informed gets lower
              by measures aimed at promoting turnout. Consequently, it is reasonable to believe that
              usage of VAAs affects electoral turnout.                            
              Concluding discussion                                               
              The EP elections have been characterized by lack of interest and low turnout for decades
              compared to national parliamentary elections. This has been an important issue in EU
              politics as a lack of interest and low turnout generate legitimacy issues in the EU (Clark
              2014:341-2). Several attempts have been implemented to change this trend. The EP
              election 2019 saw for the first time since the introduction of EP elections in 1979 increa-
              sing turnout rates (CERGU 2019) and turnout continued to increase during the EP
              elections 2024 (European Parliament 2024:41) which has several reasons. One reason
              might be that campaign efforts aiming to increase political awareness and promote
              turnout, as well as the media, has taken a larger role which potentially leads to higher
              turnout (Marquart et.al. 2020). This paper has investigated the specific mobilizing
              capacity of VAAs as a tool to promote turnout during EP elections and national elections.
                Even though several studies have researched the impact of VAAs on turnout and
              found positive results (for example Germann and Gemenis 2019; Gemenis et.al. 2014;
              Garzia et.al. 2014, Dinas 2014), this paper fills the research gap concerning VAAs and
              turnout in several aspects. First, previous studies have not made comparative studies in
              that sense that they compare the impact of VAAs depending on the electoral context and
              have only investigated one election at a time and/or one type of election which proble-
              matize the generalizability of the results. Since voters behave differently in national elec-
              tions and EP elections, it is also possible that VAAs affect turnout differently in these
              elections. Secondly, according to Munzert and Ramirez-Ruiz (2021:699-700), some
              positive results in previous studies might have been inflated due to methodological issues.
              This paper use validated register data for several variables and therefore bypass problems
              with for example memory failure, social desirability bias and writing errors in these
              variables. Thirdly, since the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the EP election in
              2019 occurred only 7,5 months apart, this creates a favorable setting for comparing the
              elections.                                                          
                To begin with, the results showed that usage of VAAs had a positive impact on
              electoral turnout in both elections of interest. Furthermore, the results showed that usage
              of VAAs had a much larger impact on turnout in the EP election 2019 (13 percentage
              points difference between non-VAA users and VAA users) compared with the Swedish
              parliamentary election 2018 (1 percentage point difference between non-VAA users and
              VAA users). Even though these results should be interpreted with slight caution as
              discussed in the previous chapter, it is still evident that the impact of VAAs was larger
              during the EP election 2019.                                        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        15                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 18 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                What are the theoretical implications for these results? Proponents of the rational
              choice theory argue that by getting politically informed without much effort, the
              probability of voting increases. Therefore, by using VAAs, voters get easily accessible
              and understandable information without much time and effort required and might
              therefore be more motivated to vote. The results in this paper have shown that usage of
              VAAs does have the potential to increase the probability of voting in not only one, but
              two elections. The finding that the difference between VAA users and non-VAA users is
              larger during the EP election 2019 than in the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 is in
              line with previous research by Lefevere and Aelst (2014) and Marquart et.al. (2020) who
              argues that campaign efforts aimed at promoting electoral turnout have a larger effect
              in EP elections. The results also confirmed the suggestion by Van de Pol (2019:235) that
              the mobilizing capacity of VAAs is larger during second-order elections such as the EP
              elections.                                                          
                The interpretation of the results seems to lend more support to alternative explana-
              tions for voting behaviour in EP elections than the second-order election theory. Propo-
              nents of alternative explanations argue that albeit that the level of interest and electoral
              participation is lower in EP elections compared with national elections, the interest in
              EP elections is increasing. The finding that the share of the electorate using VAAs in the
              EP election 2019 and the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 did not differ very much
              (47 per cent and 55 per cent respectively) might confirm this assumption. That the usage
              is more widespread in the latter is not surprising given that also the official turnout rates
              are higher during Swedish parliamentary elections than in EP elections. What is more
              surprising is that almost half of the electorate used VAAs in the EP election 2019 while
              the turnout rates in EP elections are much lower. The reason for the relatively widespread
              usage of VAAs during the EP election 2019 might derive from the purposes of using
              VAAs. Since the amount of seekers is higher in EP elections than in national elections,
              this implicates that these users are more affected by VAAs and interested in learning
              about EP elections compared to users who use VAAs for entertainment (checkers).
                However, it is still a fact that the level of interest and electoral participation is lower
              in EP elections compared with national elections. In national elections, voters are
              acquainted with voting and the elections are deeply rooted in the electoral system, mea-
              ning that voters display more robust voting behavior and might not be as influenced by
              mobilizing efforts and other measures. In the EP elections, this is not the case, and voters
              are more likely to get affected by mobilizing efforts aimed at promoting higher turnout
              (Lefevere & Aelst 2014; Marquart 2020).                             
                The results found in this paper imply that VAAs have the potential to be real deal-
              breakers during elections and have the capacity to function as a tool to increase interest
              and electoral turnout, especially during EP elections. To increase interest and turnout in
              EP elections has been an important issue in EU politics for many years and the results in
              this paper imply that VAAs can function as a remedy for the low levels of interest and
              turnout. These findings have large implications for future development and
              understanding of VAAs. The results can potentially lead to the media, political actors,
              and academics to see the potential in VAAs and continue with further work to improve
              aspects surrounding VAAs and conduct further research.              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        16                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 19 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              References                                                          
              Ahmad, Syahrul Ahmas, Ismail, Ida Suriya, Azmi, Nurul, & Zakaria, Nor Balkish
               (2014). Methodological Issues in Whistle-blowing Intentions Research: Addressing
               the Social Desirability Bias and Order Effect Bias. Procedia - Social and Behavioral
               Sciences, 145(C), 204-210.                                         
                                                                                  
              Benesch, Christine, Heim, Rino & Schelker, Mark ; Schmid, Lukas (2023). Do Voting
               Advice Applications Change Political Behavior? The Journal of Politics, 85(2), 684–
               700                                                                
              Bhatti, Yosef, Hansen, Caspar M., & Wass, Hanna (2012). The relationship between
               age and turnout: A roller-coaster ride. Electoral Studies, 31(3), 588-593.
                                                                                  
              Carubba, Cliff & Timpone, Richard J. (2005). Explaining Vote Switching Across First-
               and Second-Order Elections: Evidence From Europe, Comparative political studies,
               38(3), 260281.                                                     
                                                                                  
              Centre for European Research, CERGU (2019) The result of the Swedish EU election
               2019. Retrieved: 2024-05-02. Available: https://www.gu.se/sites/default/files/2020-
               09/Fact%20sheet%20about%20the%20EU%20elections%202019.23%20-       
               %20The%20results%20of%20the%20EU%20election%202019.pdf             
                                                                                  
              Clark, Nicholas (2014). Explaining Low Turnout in European Elections: The Role of
               Issue Salience and Institutional Perceptions in Elections to the European Parliament.
               Journal of European Integration, 36(4), 339-356.                   
              Clark, Nicholas, & Rohrschneider, Robert (2009). Second-Order Elections versus First-
               Order Thinking: How Voters Perceive the Representation Process in a Multi-Layered
               System of Governance. Journal of European Integration: European Parliament
               Elections after Eastern Enlargement, 31(5), 645-664.               
                                                                                  
              Dinas, Elias, Trechsel, Alexander H. & Vassil, Kristjan (2014). A look into the mirror:
                Preferences, representation and electoral participation. Electoral Studies, 36(C), 290-
                297.                                                              
                                                                                  
              Enyedi, Zslot (2016). The Influence of Voting Advice Applications on Preferences,
                Loyalties and Turnout: An Experimental Study. Political Studies, 64(4), 1000-1015.
                                                                                  
              European Parliament (2019) Review of European and national election results.
                Retrieved: 2024-05-12. Available: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/at-your-
                service/files/be-                                                 
                heard/eurobarometer/2019/review_of_european_and_national_election_results_201
                9/incoming_ep_2019.pdf                                            
              European Parliament (2024) European and National Elections results review, September
                2024 edition. Retrieved: 2024-11-25. Available: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/at-
                your-service/files/be-heard/eurobarometer/2024/review-of-european-and-national-
                elections-september-2024.pdf                                      
                                                                                  
              Evertsson, Kajsa (2020) Promoting electoral turnout through voting advice applications?
                A comparative approach between the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and the
                European Parliament election 2019, (Master Thesis), University of Gothenburg.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        17                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 20 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Fischer, Moritz Valentin, Tschochohei, Philipp, Anders, Laura, Breuer, Kimberly Dana,
               Hermida Carrillo, Alejandro, & Diefenbach, Sarah(2017). Exploring the Social
               Media Impact of Voting Advice Apps: A Case Study on the Representation of the
               Wahl-O-Mat on Twitter. I-com, 16(3), 279-285.                      
              Garzia, Diego, De Angelis, Alexander H & Pianzola, Joelle (2014) The Impact of Voting
               Advice Applications on Electoral Participation in Garzia, D., Marschall, S., &
               European Consortium for Political Research. (2014). Matching voters with parties
               and candidates: Voting advice applications in a comparative perspective. Colchester:
               European Consortium for Political Research.                        
                                                                                  
              Gemenis, Kostas (2024). Artificial intelligence and voting advice applications. Frontiers
               in Political Science, 6.                                           
                                                                                  
              Gemenis, Kostas & Rosema, Martin (2014). Voting Advice Applications and electoral
               turnout. Electoral Studies, 36(C), 281-289.                        
                                                                                  
              Germann, Micha, Mendez, Fernando, & Gemenis, Kostas (2023). Do Voting Advice
               Applications Affect Party Preferences? Evidence from Field Experiments in Five
               European Countries. Political Communication, 40(5), 596–614.       
              Haenschen, Katherine (2016). Social Pressure on Social Media: Using Facebook Status
                Updates to Increase Voter Turnout. Journal of Communication, 66(4), 542-563.
                                                                                  
              Hobolt, Sara (2015). The 2014 European Parliament Elections: Divided in Unity?
                JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies, 53(S1), 6-21.             
                                                                                  
              Hobolt, Sara & De Vries, Catherine (2016). Turning against the Union? The impact of
               the crisis on the Eurosceptic vote in the 2014 European Parliament elections. Electoral
               Studies, 44(C), 504-514.                                           
                                                                                  
              Hobolt, Sara & Spoon, Jae-Jae (2012). Motivating the European voter: Parties, issues
                and campaigns in European Parliament elections. European Journal of Political
                Research, 51(6), 701-727.                                         
                                                                                  
              Hobolt, Sara, & Wittrock, Jill (2011). The second-order election model revisited: An
               experimental test of vote choices in European Parliament elections. Electoral Studies,
               30(1), 29-40.                                                      
              Holbrook, Allyson & Krosnick, Jon A. (2010). Measuring Voter Turnout By Using The
               Randomized Response Technique: Evidence Calling Into Question The Method's
               Validity. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 74(2), 328-343.            
                                                                                  
              Hong, Geeyoung (2015) Explaining vote switching to niche parties in the 2009
                European Parliament elections, European Union Politics 2015, 16(4), 514–53.
                                                                                  
              Kamoen, Naomi, McCartan, Tessa & Liebrecht, Christine (2022). Conversational Agent
               Voting Advice Applications: A Comparison Between a Structured, Semi-structured,
                and Non-structured Chatbot Design for Communicating with Voters About Political
                Issues, in Chatbot Research and Design (Vol. 13171, pp. 160–175). Springer
                International Publishing AG.                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        18                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 21 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Kleinnijenhuis, Jan, Van de Pol, Jasper, Van Hoof, Anita, & Krouwel, André (2019).
               Genuine effects of vote advice applications on party choice: Filtering out factors that
               affect both the advice obtained and the vote. Party Politics, 25(3), 291-302.
              Krouwel, André, Vitello, Thomas & Wall, Matthew (2014) Voting Advice Applications
               as Campaign Actors: Mapping VAAs’ Interactions with Parties, Media and Voters in
               Garzia, D., Marschall, S., & European Consortium for Political Research. (2014).
               Matching voters with parties and candidates: Voting advice applications in a
               comparative perspective. Colchester: European Consortium for Political Research
                                                                                  
              Lefevere, Jonas, & Van Aelst, Peter (2014). First-order, second-order or third-rate? A
               comparison of turnout in European, local and national elections in the Netherlands.
               Electoral Studies, 35, 159-170.                                    
                                                                                  
              Liao, Da-Chi, Chiou, Wen Bin, Jang, Janyeok, & Cheng, Shao Hua (2022) Strengthening
               voter competence through voting advice applications: an experimental study of the
               iVoter in Taiwan. Asian Education and Development Studies, 11(2), 213–223.
                                                                                  
              Marsh, Michael & Mikhaylov, Slava (2010) European Parliament elections and EU
                governance. Living Reviews in European Governance, 5(4), 4-30.    
              Marschall, Stefan (2014) Profiling Users in Garzia, D., Marschall, S., & European
               Consortium for Political Research. (2014). Matching voters with parties and
               candidates: Voting advice applications in a comparative perspective. Colchester:
               European Consortium for Political Research.                        
                                                                                  
              Marquart, Franziska, Goldberg, Andreas & de Vreese, Claes (2020) ‘This time I’m (not)
                voting’: A comprehensive overview of campaign factors influencing turnout at
                European Parliament elections, European Union Politics 1–26, Sage Publishing.
                                                                                  
              Munzert, Simon & Ramirez-Ruiz, Sebastian (2021). Meta-Analysis of the Effects of
                Voting Advice Applications. Political Communication, 38(6), 691–706.
                                                                                  
              Oscarsson, Henrik & Holmberg, Sören (2016). Svenska väljare (Upplaga 1:1 ed.).
                Stockholm: Wolters Kluwer.                                        
              Oscarsson, Henrik, Bäckstedt, Felix, Cederholm Lager, Anna, Karlsson, Richard &
                Solevid, Maria (2022) Väljarna och valet 2022. Valforskningsprogrammet. Göteborg
                Studies in Politics 186, Göteborgs universitet                    
                                                                                  
              Reif, Karlheinz & Schmitt, Hermann (1980) Nine second-order national elections – a
                conceptual framework for the analysis of European election results, European Journal
                of Political Research, 8(1), 3-44.                                
                                                                                  
              Swedish National Election Studies, SNES (2018) Valundersökningen 2018. Retrieved:
                2024-05-13. Available: https://www.gu.se/sites/default/files/2024-06/VU_2018.pdf
                                                                                  
              Swedish National Election Studies, SNES (2019) Europaparlamentsundersökningen
                2019. Retrieved: 2024-05-28. Available: https://www.gu.se/sites/default/files/2024-
                06/EP_2019.pdf                                                    
                                                                                  
              Swedish National Election Studies, SNES (2020) User Guide. University of Gothenburg.
              Wall, Matthew, Krouwel, André, & Vitiello, Thomas (2014). Do voters follow the
                recommendations of voter advice application websites? A study of the effects of
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        19                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 22 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
               kieskompas.nl on its users’ vote choices in the 2010 Dutch legislative elections. Party
               Politics, 20(3), 416-428.                                          
              Van de Pol, Jasper, Holleman, Bregje, Kamoen, Naomi, Krouwel, André, & De Vreese,
               Claes (2014). Beyond Young, Highly Educated Males: A Typology of VAA Users.
               Journal of Information Technology & Politics, 11(4), 397-411.      
                                                                                  
              Van de Pol, Jan, Kamoen, Naomi, Krouwel, André, De Vreese, Claes, Holleman, Bregje
               (2019). Same but different: A typology of Voting Advice Application users in first-
               and second-order elections. Acta Politica, 54(2), 225-244.         
                                                                                  
              Weaver, Pamela, Choi, Jeong, & Kaufman, Tammie (1997). Question Wording and
               Response Bias: Students' Perceptions of Ethical Issues in the Hospitality and Tourism
               Industry. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Education, 9(2), 21-26. 
                                                                                  
              Verba, Sidney, Schlozman, Kay L. & Brady, Henry (1995). Voice and equality: civic
               voluntarism in American politics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
                                                                                  
              Wessel Tromborg, Mathias & Albertsen, Andreas (2023). Candidates, voters, and voting
               advice applications. European Political Science Review, 15(4), 582–599.
              Williams, Richard (2012) Using the margins command to estimate and interpret adjusted
               predictions and marginal effects. The Stata Journal 12(2), 308-331.
                                                                                  
              Valmyndigheten (2020a) Valresultat 2018. Retrieved: 2024-05-01. Available:
               https://www.val.se/valresultat/riksdag-region-och-kommun/2018/valresultat.html
                                                                                  
              Valmyndigheten (2020b) Valresultat 2019. Retrieved: 2024-05-01. Available:
                https://www.val.se/valresultat/europaparlamentet/2019/valresultat.html
                                                                                  
              Viola, Donatella M. (2015). The genesis of the European parliament: From appointed
                consultative assembly to directly elected legislative body. Routledge Handbook of
                European Elections. Taylor and Francis.                           
                                                                                  
              Voogt, Robert & Saris, Willem E. (2003) To Participate or Not to Participate: The Link
               Between Survey Participation, Electoral Participation, and Political Interest, Political
               Analysis, 11(2),164-179. Cambridge University Press.               
              Treib, Oliver (2014) The voter says no, but nobody listens: causes and consequences of
               the Eurosceptic vote in the 2014 European elections, Journal of European Public
               Policy, 21(10), 1541-1554.                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        20                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 23 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Appendix                                                            
                                                                                  
              Appendix A: Description of material                                 
                                                                                  
                         Swedish parliamentary election 2018, European Parliament election 2019,
                         “Election study 2018”  “European Parliament election study 2019”
              Sample size 22,970                10,000                            
              Net response rate 47,2 %          41,2 %                            
                                                                                  
              Field period 2nd of August-2nd of November 2018 27th of May-2nd of September 2019
              Number of editions 6              2                                 
              Survey method Mail or internet    Mail or internet                  
              Age of respondents 18 (and eligible to vote) to 85 18 (and eligible to vote) to 84
                                                                                  
              Source: SNES (2020) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018, and personal communication with Richard Svensson (2020-04-28) for the EP
              election 2019                                                       
                                                                                  
              Appendix B: Overview of all variables                               
                                                                                  
                              Swedish parliamentary election 2018 European Parliament election 2019
              Variable    Scale N Mean Std Dev Min Max N Mean Std Dev Min Max     
              Dependent variable                                                  
              Voted       0-1 2,520 0,98 0,15 0 1  1,907 0,80 0,40 0 1            
              Key independent                                                     
              variable                                                            
              VAA use     0-1 2,696 0,55 0,50 0 1  2,054 0,83 0,38 0 1            
              Ind. resource variables:                                            
              Male        0-1 3,267 0,51 0,50 0 1  1,911 0,49 0,50 0 1            
              Age         Contin. 3,267 53,66 17,36 18 84 1,911 53,91 16,91 18 81 
              Age squared Contin. 3,267 3181 1788 324 7056 1,911 3192 1742 324 6561
              Education   1-3 3,026 2,34 0,70 1 3  2,025 2,38 0,68 1 3            
              Income      1-3 1,886 2,08 0,86 1 3  1,391 2,16 0,87 1 3            
              Marital status 0-1 3,069 1,71 0,45 1 2 2,056 1,72 0,45 1 2          
              Place of residence 1-4 3,086 2,68 0,91 1 4 2,045 2,70 0,91 1 4      
              Ind. motivational                                                   
              variables:                                                          
              Political interest 0-1 3,227 1,67 0,47 1 2 2,078 1,65 0,48 1 4      
              Party supporter 0-1 2,777 1,32 0,47 1 2 1,883 1,34 0,48 1 2         
              L-R Ideology 1-10 3,076 2,10 0,89 1 10 1,977 5,31 2,57 1 10         
              Membership in trade 0-1 3,025 1,54 0,50 1 2 1,971 1,52 0,50 1 2     
              union/professional                                                  
              organization                                                        
              Contextual/ campaign                                                
              variables:                                                          
              Campaign interesting 0-1 2,478 1,62 0,49 1 2 1,722 1,32 0,47 1 2    
              Clear party differences 0-1 2,483 1,47 0,50 1 2 1,695 1,46 0,50 1 2 
              Campaign bickering 0-1 2,487 1,18 0,37 1 2 1,718 1,24 0,43 1 2      
              Convinced to vote 0-1 2,694 1,17 0,38 1 2 2,062 1,19 0,40 1 2       
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        21                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 24 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Appendix C: Logistic regression of effects on the dependent variable Electoral turnout
              during the Swedish parliamentary election 2018                      
                                 Model 1   Model 2  Model 3  Model 4              
                                Coef  PP Coef PP  Coef  PP  Coef  PP              
                                (S.E)    (S.E)    (S.E)     (S.E)                 
              VAA usage (ref=Not used VAAs) ∆ ∆        ∆         ∆                
              Used a VAA       1,14** 0,014 1,18** 0,015 1,09** 0,019 1,32** 0,010
                               (0,54)   (0,47)   (0,48)    (0,58)                 
              Gender (ref=Female)                                                 
              Male             0,51 0,004                  0,59 0,003             
                               (0,50)                      (0,52)                 
              Age              -0,23* 0,0002               -0,28** 0,00008        
                               (0,13)                      (0,14                  
              Age squared5     0,003**                     0,003**                
                               (0,001)                     (0,006)                
              Education (ref= Low education)                                      
              Medium education 0,74 0,005                  1,06 0,004             
                               (0,91)                      (0,98)                 
              High education   0,77 (0,95) 0,005           1,07 0,004             
                                                           (1,03)                 
              Income (ref=Low income)                                             
              Medium income    0,06 -0,007                 0,18 -0,004            
                               (0,63)                      (0,67)                 
              High income      1,05 0,003                  1,16 0,002             
                               (0,68)                      (0,73)                 
              Marital status                                                      
              (ref=Single/Widow/Widower)                                          
              Cohabitant/Married/Partnership 1,29*** 0,015 1,30*** 0,010          
                               (0,49)                      (0,51)                 
              Place of residence (ref=Rural                                       
              area)                                                               
              Small town/village -0,63 -0,011              -0,77 -0,009           
                               (0,73)                      (0,76)                 
              Big town/City    0,23 0,004                  0,31 0,003             
                               (0,72)                      (0,76)                 
              Large city       1,33 0,010                  1,45 0,007             
                               (1,19)                      (1,22)                 
              Member in trade                                                     
              union/professional organization                                     
              (ref=Not member)                                                    
              Member                    0,14 -0,0006       0,04 -0,0008           
                                        (0,49)             (0,54)                 
              Political interest (ref=Not                                         
              interested)                                                         
              Interested                0,08 0,0009        0,006 0,0002           
                                        (0,47)             (0,54)                 
              Political affiliation (ref=Not                                      
              identify with a party)                                              
              Identify with a party     2,33** 0,018       2,65** 0,011           
                                        (1,04)             (1,09)                 
              Ideology                  0,13 0,001         0,09 0,0006            
                                        (0,10)             (0,11)                 
              Political effect (ref=Not                                           
              interesting/exciting election)                                      
              Indeed interesting/exciting        0,14 0,002 -0,27 -0,0014         
              election                           (0,49)    (0,53)                 
              Clear party differences (ref=Not                                    
              clear party differences)                                            
              Indeed clear party differences     0,06 0,0008 -0,26 -0,0014        
                                                 (0,48)    (0,52)                 
              5 Naturally, predicted probabilities for Age squared not included   
                                        22                                        

===== sida 25 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Opinion about the election                                          
              campaign (ref=Too much party                                        
              bickering)                                                          
              Not too much party bickering       0,22 0,003 0,03 0,001            
                                                 (0,65)    (0,68)                 
              Convinced to vote (ref=Not                                          
              convinced)                                                          
              Convinced                          -0,75 -0,013 -0,25 -0,006        
                                                 (0,51)    (0,55)                 
              Constant         5,53*    2,27**   3,51***   5,76*                  
                               (3,03)   (0,65)   (0,45)    (3,17)                 
              Pseudo           0,1392   0,0827   0,0377    0,2118                 
              N    𝟐𝟐          1,125    1,125    1,125     1,125                  
              Note: Depe𝑹𝑹ndent variable Electoral turnout (1=voted, 0=not voted). Entries are coefficients, standard errors and predicted probabilities ( PP) from
              logistic regression computed using Stata. Standard errors in brackets. Number of observations hold constant due to missing values. *** , ** and *
              denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 per cent, respectively. ∆
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019
              Appendix D: Logistic regression of effects on the dependent variable Electoral turnout
              during the European Parliament election 2019                        
                                  Model 1  Model 2  Model 3  Model 4              
                                Coef  PP  Coef PP  Coef PP  Coef  PP              
                                (S.E)     (S.E)    (S.E)    (S.E)                 
              VAA usage (ref=Not used VAAs) ∆ ∆         ∆        ∆                
              Used a VAA        1,23*** 0,14 1,15*** 0,13 1,22*** 0,14 1,30*** 0,13
                                (0,22)   (0,21)   (0,21)   (0,23)                 
              Gender (ref=Female)                                                 
              Male              0,11 0,01                  0,08  0,007            
                                (0,21)                     (0,23)                 
              Age               0,02 0,004                 0,01  0,003            
                                (0,06)                     (0,06)                 
              Age squared6      0,0002                     0,0003                 
                                (0,0006)                   (0,0006)               
              Education (ref= Low education)                                      
              Medium education  0,28 0,04                  0,27  0,03             
                                (0,43)                     (0,46)                 
              High education    0,90** 0,11                0,76  0,08             
                                (0,45)                     (0,47)                 
              Income (ref=Low income)                                             
              Medium income     -0,07 -0,01                -0,02 -0,007           
                                (0,29)                     (0,31)                 
              High income       0,37 0,03                  0,48  0,04             
                                (0,28)                     (0,30)                 
              Marital status                                                      
              (ref=Single/Widow/Widower)                                          
              Cohabitant/Married/Partnershi 0,15 0,02      0,13  0,01             
              p                 (0,24)                     (0,25)                 
              Place of residence (ref=Rural                                       
              area)                                                               
              Small town/village 0,08 0,01                 0,10  0,009            
                                (0,33)                     (0,35)                 
              Big town/City     0,12 0,01                  -0,002 -               
                                (0,30)                     (0,31) 0,0003          
              Large city        0,82** 0,07                -0,75* 0,06            
                                (0,38)                     (0,40)                 
              Member in trade                                                     
              union/professional                                                  
              organization (ref=Not member)                                       
              Member                     0,18 0,02         0,20  0,02             
                                         (0,20)            (0,23)                 
              6 Naturally, predicted probabilities for Age squared not included   
                                        23                                        

===== sida 26 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Political interest (ref=Not                                         
              interested)                                                         
              Interested                 1,09*** 0,14      0,65*** 0,06           
                                         (0,20)            (0,23)                 
              Political affiliation (ref=Not                                      
              identify with a party)                                              
              Identify with a party      0,28 0,03         0,06  0,005            
                                         (0,22)            (0,24)                 
              Ideology                   -0,07* -          -0,09** -0,008         
                                         (0,04) 0,007      (0,04)                 
              Political effect (ref=Not                                           
              interesting/exciting election)                                      
              Indeed interesting/exciting         0,74** 0,07 0,62** 0,05         
              election                            (0,227)  (0,28)                 
              Clear party differences                                             
              (ref=Not clear party                                                
              differences)                                                        
              Indeed clear party differences      0,61*** 0,06 0,65*** 0,06       
                                                  (0,21)   (0,23)                 
              Opinion about the election                                          
              campaign (ref=Too much party                                        
              bickering)                                                          
              Not too much party bickering        -0,05 -  -0,06 -0,005           
                                                  (0,24) 0,005 (0,25)             
              Convinced to vote (ref=Not                                          
              convinced)                                                          
              Convinced                           -1,03*** -0,13 -0,82*** -0,09   
                                                  (0,22)   (0,24)                 
              Constant          -1,48    0,71**   1,07***  -1,25                  
                                (1,25)   (0,33)   (0,17)   (1,35)                 
              Pseudo            0,1103   0,0961   0,1031   0,1774                 
              N    𝟐𝟐           884      884      884      884                    
                  𝑹𝑹                                                              
              Note: Dependent variable Electoral turnout (1=voted, 0=not voted). Entries are coefficients, standard errors and predicted probabilities ( PP) from
              logistic regression computed using Stata. Standard errors in brackets. Number of observations hold constant due to missing values. *** , ** and *
              denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 per cent, respectively. ∆
              Source: SNES (2018) for the Swedish parliamentary election 2018 and SNES (2019b) for the EP election 2019
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        24                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 27 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       Rapport                                    
                                        2024:6                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Appendix E: Predicted Probability of voting in the Swedish parliamentary election 2018
              depending on age categories                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Source: SNES (2018)                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        25                                        
                                                                                  

===== sida 28 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Swedish National Election Studies                                            
     Department of Political Science                                              
     University of Gothenburg                                                     
     Box 711, SE-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     The Swedish National Election Studies Program                                
     was established in 1954 by Jörgen Westerståhl                                
     and Bo Särlvik and is today a high profile network                           
     of researchers at the Department of Political                                
     Science in Gothenburg. The Program serve                                     
     as a collaborative platform for Swedish and                                  
     international scholars interested in studies of                              
     electoral democracy, representative democracy,                               
     opinion formation, and voting behavior.                                      
      The aim of our research is among others to                                  
     explain why people vote as they do and why an                                
     election ends in a particular way. We track and                              
     follow trends in the Swedish electoral democracy                             
     and make comparisons with other countries.                                   
     Professor Henrik Ekengren Oscarsson is the                                   
     director of the Swedish Election Studies Program.                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
